Exploring Smart Commercial Building Occupants  Perceptions and Notification
Preferences of Internet of Things Data Collection in the United States
Tu Le1,2, Alan Wang1, Yaxing Yao3, Yuanyuan Feng4, Arsalan Heydarian1, Norman Sadeh5, and Yuan Tian1,2
1University of Virginia
2University of California, Los Angeles
3University of Maryland, Baltimore County
4University of Vermont
5Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract  Data collection through the Internet of Things
(IoT) devices, or smart devices, in commercial buildings
enables possibilities for increased convenience and energy
efficiency. However, such benefits face a large perceptual
challenge when being implemented in practice, due to the different
 ways occupants working in the buildings understand
and trust in the data collection. The semi-public, pervasive,
and multi-modal nature of data collection in smart buildings
points to the need to study occupants  understanding of data
collection and notification preferences. We conduct an online
study with 492 participants in the US who report working
in smart commercial buildings regarding  1) awareness and
perception of data collection in smart commercial buildings,
2) privacy notification preferences, and 3) potential factors
for privacy notification preferences. We find that around
half of the participants are not fully aware of the data
collection and use practices of IoT even though they notice
the presence of IoT devices and sensors. We also discover
many misunderstandings around different data practices.
The majority of participants want to be notified of data
practices in smart buildings, and they prefer push notifications
 to passive ones such as websites or physical signs.
Surprisingly, mobile app notification, despite being a popular
channel for smart homes, is the least preferred method for
smart commercial buildings.
Index Terms  data collection, notification, privacy, IoT,
smart building, smart devices
1. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT), or smart devices, have
increasingly made their way into various physical environments,
 transitioning them into  smart environments .
These smart devices have introduced significant benefits
to users and society at large. Continuous monitoring of
indoor environmental conditions and user behaviors in
smart devices-equipped buildings can help reduce energy
consumption as well as enhance users  comfort and wellbeing
 [3], [44]. For example, Lu et al. [29] shows that
using sensors to intelligently control the home s heating,
ventilation, and cooling (HV AC) system can achieve a
28% energy saving. Figueiro et al. also shows how prop-erly applied light exposures can increase alertness and
circadian entertainment [20].
Problem. Despite the numerous potential benefits of
making environments  smarter , the transition may also
introduce great challenges due to the potential privacy
issues [28]. Continuous data collection can expose more
data than anticipated by the users, and the collected data
can be shared with third parties [13], [35]. One particular
privacy issue in these environments relates to occupants 
awareness of these smart devices and their data collection
and use practices. Research has shown that occupants in
smart environments have significant privacy concerns, yet
the level of transparency regarding the data practices in
smart environments and their ability to control these data
practices are limited [23]. To increase the transparency of
data practices and raise occupants  awareness of data practices
 in smart environments, research has proposed various
mechanisms, such as notifications via mobile devices,
network monitoring through web apps, ambient lights, and
sounds, etc. [14], [19], [27], [33], [43]. However, prior
research primarily focuses on smart homes, with less focus
on other more public smart environments. Several key differences
 exist between managing privacy in homes versus
commercial buildings, making smart building privacy notification
 a novel and challenging problem. First, in a home,
the same people affected by the potential privacy invasions
are mostly capable of changing or removing the offending
 devices. In contrast, in a commercial building, the
occupants might be less aware of the data collection and
might feel they are less in control of their privacy. Second,
the occupants might have a different mental model when
facing the commercial buildings  pervasive data collection
compared to their own homes. Finally, smart building data
collection is multi-modal, pervasive, and large-scale. The
privacy notifications, if not well designed, will cause user
apathy or misunderstanding. As a result, there is a need to
comprehensively understand users  awareness, perceptions
of data collection, and privacy notification preferences in
the smart commercial building environment to inform the
design of smart building privacy notifications.
Research Goal. In this paper, we focus on smart commercial
 buildings, an understudied yet important smart
environment in the privacy literature. We use  smart commercial
 buildings  to denote commercial buildings thatarXiv 2303.04955v3  [cs.CR]  30 Nov 2023are equipped with smart devices (e.g., Internet-connected
security cameras) and sensors (e.g., smart water meters),
and use  occupants  to denote people who work in or
regularly enter these buildings. We aim to understand
occupants  awareness of smart devices in these buildings,
as well as their preferences in receiving notifications about
smart devices and their associated data practices. Our
scope focuses on occupants in the US.
Importance. This research is significant for two reasons.
 First, due to the nature of occupants  tasks and activities
 in smart commercial buildings, the privacy implications
 can be different from those in other environments,
such as smart homes. Particularly, how to appropriately
handle privacy notifications in smart buildings remains an
open issue. In addition, existing techniques for maintaining
 privacy in other IoT environments such as smart homes
are unlikely to apply in the smart building context. For example,
 the power dynamics in smart commercial buildings
(e.g., employers vs. employees, administrators vs. tenants)
may influence how occupants perceive privacy. Second,
recent privacy regulations around the world have also
mandated the disclosure of certain data collection practices
 in public places. For example, both the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the California Consumer
 Privacy Act (CCPA) protect users  control over any
personal information a business collects about them [11],
[21], [22], [32]. As a result, it is important to understand
occupants  privacy expectations and study their privacy
notification preferences in smart commercial buildings.
It is also timely for building owners to understand the
mechanisms underlying privacy expectations and build a
fiduciary relationship with their occupants.
Research Questions. In this paper, we aim to answer
the following research questions 
 RQ1  What are the occupants  perceptions of data
collection in smart commercial buildings 
 RQ2  What are the occupants  notification preferences
 for data collection in smart commercial buildings
 in different contexts 
 RQ3  What potential factors affect occupants  notification
 preferences for data collection in smart
commercial buildings in different contexts 
Our Study. To answer these research questions, we
conducted an online study of 492 participants in the US.
Our participants are people who have worked in smart
commercial buildings. We use the term (smart) commercial
 building throughout the paper to indicate our participants 
 indoor workplaces that deploy IoT devices/sensors
other than their homes. In our study, we explored the
participants  awareness and perception of data collection
in the buildings and used a series of questions to identify
whether they want to be notified on the different modalities
 of data collection, why or why not to be notified,
what type of information should be communicated, and
how they would like to receive these notifications. We
design three hypothetical scenarios based on common
IoT devices in smart buildings (i.e., Bluetooth beacons,
cameras, smart meters) to ask about participants  privacy
notification preferences.
Key Findings. Our results suggest that many participants
 are unaware of or have misunderstandings of
the data collection in smart commercial buildings. Evenparticipants who are highly confident about their knowledge
 of IoT devices, still have misunderstandings about
data collection purposes and data access of smart devices
in smart commercial buildings. For example, few people
understood that Bluetooth beacon s data would be used for
localization even though localization is in fact its primary
data purpose. One participant even incorrectly assumed
that Bluetooth beacon could get unauthorized access to
his/her phone. In terms of their notification preferences,
the majority of our participants (91%) indicated their
willingness to receive notifications about the data practices
regardless of their prior knowledge of smart devices. We
also found that email was the most desired channel to deliver
 privacy-related notifications, while some participants
preferred other channels (e.g., physical signs) depending
on the scenarios. Our data helps us identify several factors
that may impact our participants  notification preferences,
such as their awareness of data collection and confidence
in their knowledge of smart devices.
Contributions. This work contributes to privacy research
 and human-centered computing in several aspects 
 We provide a comprehensive user study to understand
 occupants  awareness and perceptions of data
collection in smart commercial buildings, generating
important empirical evidence in this area of research.
 Our study provides a systematic understanding of
occupants  preferences for privacy notifications in
smart commercial buildings and the potential factors
that impact their preferences.
 We draw implications for designing a transparent data
collection framework for future generations of smart
commercial buildings.
Paper Outline. The rest of the paper is organized in
the following way. We first introduce the related work in
Section 2 and then explain the design of our user study
in Section 3. We present our data analysis and results
about the user study in Section 4. We then discuss the
privacy law implications, the suggestions for improving
smart building data collection transparency, the limitations
of our study, the potential future work in Section 5, and
conclude the study in the end.
2. Related Work
This section discusses the previous work and how our
work is different. The related work is presented as three
themes  IoT in Smart Buildings, IoT Privacy, and Privacy
Notifications for IoT.
2.1. IoT in Smart Buildings
While there are many types of sensors deployed in
buildings to collect information about the occupant and
the surrounding environment, our study mainly focuses on
the three types of smart devices that are popular and have
been demonstrated to be privacy-invasive, i.e., Bluetooth
beacons, cameras, and smart meters.
For Bluetooth beacons, Caesar et al. [7] demonstrated
that Bluetooth technology can be used maliciously to track
occupant location. For example, a smartphone can be used
to secretly monitor nearby Bluetooth Mesh activity and
reference user location through transmissions, or an appinstalled on smartphones can be used to track a user within
a Bluetooth Mesh network.
For cameras, besides being able to identify users
directly, cameras also reveal information that might be
difficult or impossible to detect with the naked eye. For
example, Davis et al. [15] showed that audio signals could
be extracted through motion magnification of video data.
The same motion magnification technique has also been
shown to be able to extract health-related information from
users such as blood circulation [38].
For smart energy meters, Jazizadeh et al. [25] demonstrated
 how Non-Intrusive Load Monitoring (NILM), or
measuring electricity consumption using an energy meter
at the circuit level instead of the appliance level, can
still be disaggregated to extract signals of specific appliance
 use in households and occupant behaviors. Although
network communications among IoT devices can be encrypted
 to ensure privacy, Acar et al. [2] showed that an
adversary can exfiltrate sensitive data from the encrypted
traffic. Rondon et al. [36], [37] demonstrated different
attacks on different layers of enterprise IoT systems in
smart buildings.
Besides, Babun et al. [1] provided an analysis of
popular IoT platforms in terms of how they handle vulnerabilities
 and possible solutions for these platforms.
Our work focuses on the occupants  perspectives on IoT
devices and their data collection in smart buildings.
2.2. IoT Privacy
There has been considerable literature investigating
the privacy preferences and factors that affect users  privacy
 decision-making in IoT scenarios. Yao et al. [46],
[47] conducted co-design studies to identify key factors
for designing smart home privacy controls. In a broader
context, Naeini et al. [30] showed that participants were
more comfortable with data collection in public rather than
private settings and were more likely to share data for uses
that they find beneficial (e.g., find public restrooms). The
collection of biometric data is considered less comfortable
than environmental data, and the participants wanted to
be notified about the data practices of such information
being collected. Different from these previous studies, we
focus specifically on smart commercial building occupants
rather than the general users and consider participants 
background knowledge/confidence in IoT technology. We
also explore more detailed perceptions regarding notification
 preferences and how occupants want to be informed
of data collection. Via in situ studies, some previous
work found users  privacy concerns or misunderstanding
of the facial recognition technology [48], [49] and fitness
tracker [42]. In particular, Zhang et al. [48], [49] studied
people s notification preferences, including the frequency
of notifications. However, they did not explore modality
preferences such as emails versus mobile apps because
people might not have an email address in the scenarios
they considered. Harper et al. [23] conducted an online
survey of 81 participants to understand their privacy concerns
 in the smart building context, focusing on environmental
 data collection. Our work considers a larger pool of
participants, more types of smart devices, and occupants 
preferences for different notification schemes.Other work looked into the influence of friends and
experts on privacy decisions [18]. These studies showed
that participants were more influenced when their friends
denied data collection than when their friends allowed data
collection. In contrast, the participants were more influenced
 when experts allowed collection than when experts
denied data collection. However, after being exposed to a
set of scenarios in which friends and experts allowed or
denied data collection, the participants were less likely to
be influenced in subsequent scenarios. Barbosa et al. [6]
presented machine learning models to predict personalized
privacy preferences in smart homes and identify factors
that could change such preferences.
Several frameworks were proposed to help users to
enforce privacy protections on IoT devices. Apthorpe et
al. [4] presented a framework to discover the privacy
norms in the smart home context. IoTWatch [5] allows
users to specify their privacy preferences at install time
and ensure IoT apps  behaviors match the selections.
Kratos [40] provides smart home users with access control
 settings that consider multiple users and devices
in a shared space. Cejka et al. [8] presented potential
countermeasures for privacy issues of smart meters. Wu
et al. [45] proposed a privacy-preserving framework to
support sensor applications such as occupancy detection
while ensuring user privacy. In contrast, our work contributes
 new insights into smart building data collection
from occupants  perspectives to support future designs of
systems and frameworks.
2.3. Privacy Notifications for IoT
Privacy notifications are a type of privacy notice that
informs people or users about the data being collected
and using practices of a system, product, or service.
They are often provided by entities responsible for the
disclosed data practices (e.g., data collection, sharing, and
processing), as increasing requirements by privacy regulations
 around the world (e.g., GDPR [11], CCPA [32]).
Although privacy policies are the most common type of
privacy notice, they are lengthy and difficult to read [12],
[31]. Instead, researchers and practitioners have proposed
more effective ways to notify people about data privacy
practices, such as concise privacy notices [16] and privacy
nutrition labels [17]. Moreover, Schaub et al. outlined a
design space for more effective privacy notices [39].
User-facing privacy notifications, in addition to or in
lieu of privacy policies, are very common in the digital
world. For example, websites have increasingly adopted
GDPR-compliant cookie banners, which automatically
pop up when websites detect new users. These banners
usually contain a concise privacy notification describing
how the website uses cookies to track user data and how
users can disable some of them [10]. Another common
example is the app permission management framework
on smartphones. Both iOS and Android platforms send
users just-in-time notifications when apps are trying to
access certain sensitive permission on smartphones, along
with the choice to allow or deny. The notifications in both
examples are delivered to users through primary channels,
which is the same platform or device a user interacts
with. Huang et al. [24] presented a tool that examinesnetwork traffic in a smart home and informs the user of
vulnerabilities or tracking services.
However, in IoT-embedded smart buildings, providing
people with effective privacy notices is extremely challenging.
 First, since smart buildings have countless IoT
devices and sensors collecting data (e.g., energy sensors,
lighting, temperature, air quality, etc.), it is possible that
the number of notifications can overwhelm building occupants
 and visitors. This may lead to privacy fatigue [9] if
users receive too many irrelevant privacy notices. Second,
IoT devices and sensors in smart buildings lack traditional
user interfaces (e.g., screens), so it is difficult to deliver
privacy notifications through the most intuitive primary
channels (i.e., IoT devices and sensors themselves). This
means privacy notices need to rely on secondary or public
 channels (e.g., a website, or physical signs), causing
an additional barrier for residents or visitors to receive
them. Researchers have recently developed a locationbased
 mobile app, IoT Assistant, capable of notifying
people about nearby IoT data privacy in public places [14],
[19]. However, little research has examined what types of
IoT privacy notices people would like to receive and how
to receive them. Therefore, our study aims to understand
people s notification preferences for smart building scenarios
 to inform the design of more effective privacy notices
in smart buildings.
3. Methodology
Figure 1 shows an overview of our study workflow.
We describe our study protocol in detail in this section.
In this study, our survey design aims to investigate the
awareness and perceptions of data collection (RQ1), the
notification preferences (RQ2) of occupants in smart commercial
 buildings, and the factors that affect occupants 
notification preferences (RQ3).
Figure 1. Overview of the study protocol.
3.1. Recruitment & Screening
Our study was built via Qualtrics and posted on Prolific
 to recruit participants. To ensure the quality of the
responses, only people with at least a 95% approval rate
on Prolific were able to view our study. We also set up
Qualtrics to disallow retaking the survey. The participants
were required to be adults who are 18 or older, fluent
in English, live in the US, and have or are working in
a commercial building physically (e.g., offices or retail
stores). We further conducted a screening to determineparticipants  eligibility. If the participants had worked in
an indoor workplace other than their home, they were
eligible to participate in our study.
We paid each participant $0.5 for completing our 1minute
 screening and followed up with 597 eligible participants
 for our main survey. Our main survey (presented
in Section 3.3) took approximately 9 minutes to complete,
and each participant was paid $1.5 for completing it. The
longest completion time was 52 minutes. The completion
time included the time it took to read and sign the consent
form. Prolific allowed a minimum payment rate of $8/hour
and a recommended rate of $12/hour. Our payment rate
was set to $12/hour, which matched the recommended
amount on Prolific. Note that Prolific may request extra
payments based on the completion time. We also asked our
participants to leave feedback (if any) for our study and
we received no complaints from our participants regarding
the payment and survey length.
3.2. Study Pretest
Cognitive pretesting and pilot study are two common
practices to identify potential issues and biases in surveys,
such as priming wording or confusing questions, prior to
deployment [34]. We followed an iterative review process
in which we repeated the process of running pilot studies
to get preliminary results as well as feedback and improving
 our survey design accordingly until no issues arose.
We also tested our survey by conducting cognitive
interviews with four university students and staff outside
of the research team who are from a variety of departments
and backgrounds. During the interviews, the participants
thought out loud when taking the survey. We noted their
thought process and asked them to provide feedback for
each survey question (e.g., fixing confusing questions or
adding more answer choices).
As a result, we improved the wording and formatting
of survey questions and added additional answer choices
to some multiple-choice questions. For example, for questions
 asking about the context/scenario we give, we highlighted
 the context/scenario (e.g.,  at your workplace  or
 in the scenario ) to avoid misunderstanding according to
the suggestions from the pilot study. We excluded the pilot
study data from our final results to avoid biases.
3.3. Survey Design
In this section, we describe how we design the survey
to answer the research questions.
3.3.1. Structure and Goals. The survey includes three
sections. In the first section, we started with questions to
understand participants  general perceptions and preferences
 in smart buildings. These questions include 
 Participants  awareness of potential data collection in
the smart buildings (answering RQ1) 
 Background questions (e.g., confidence in IoT technology
 and knowledge of IoT), we analyze whether
the answers to the questions influence people s privacy
 notification preferences (answering RQ3) 
 Pre-scenario questions for occupant s general privacy
 notification preferences in the smart commercial
building setting (answering RQ2).In the second section, we randomly show the participants
 one of the three hypothetical scenarios of data collection.
 The three scenarios include common data collection
 sensors (i.e., Bluetooth beacons, cameras, and smart
meters). We then ask the participants the following two
sets of questions 
 Questions about their perceptions of data collection
in the scenario (answering RQ1) 
 Post-scenario questions about their privacy notification
 preferences for the scenario (answering RQ2).
Note that we use the same set of questions for the prescenario
 questions and post-scenario questions regarding
their privacy notification preferences. The goal is to see
whether participants  preferences would change after they
are exposed to the scenarios.
In the last section, we ask demographic questions. The
answers to these questions are used when we analyze the
factors that impact people s privacy notification choices
(answering RQ3).
3.3.2. Detailed Survey Flow. In the following, we will
explain the flow of our survey and how we collect responses
 from the participants.
 Questions about participants  awareness of potential
data collection in the smart buildings (answering
RQ1) and background (answering RQ3)  To understand
 the participants  experience of working in a
smart building environment, we first ask them to selfreport
 if they work in a smart building. We present a
set of smart devices (e.g., cameras, sensors, smart TV ,
etc.) and ask the participants to select what devices
they notice at their workplace. The participants are
able to select multiple devices and have an  other 
option to enter others. We then ask the participants
to report if they are aware of the data collection at
their workplace (Yes/No). Note that the answers to
these questions are used for two analyses  (1) understanding
 participants  awareness of data collection
(answering RQ1)  (2) understanding if awareness of
the data collection would impact people s privacy
notification choices (answering RQ3).
 Pre-scenario questions for users  general privacy notification
 references (answering RQ2)  To understand
our participants  general notification preferences for
data collection in smart buildings, we used a series
of questions to identify whether they want to be
notified, why/why not, what should be notified, and
how they want to be notified. First, we asked them
if they want to be notified about the presence of
the devices collecting data (Yes/No). We followed
up with a free-text question to let them explain their
reasons. We then presented a list of information about
data collection and asked the participants to select
what they want to be notified of. Next, we presented
a list of notification means (e.g., physical sign, email,
mobile, etc.) and asked the participants to select the
means of notification that they prefer. Note that for
these multiple-choice questions, the participants can
select multiple items and have the option to enter additional
 text answers. We later repeated this series of
notification preferences questions after presenting the
scenarios to understand the participants  preferences
specifically for each scenario. Scenarios-based questions  To understand users  perception
 of data collection, and privacy notification
preferences, we designed three common data collection
 scenarios for the participants to check during the
survey. Each scenario represents a type and purpose
of data collection with different devices typically
found in a smart commercial building. We study
three devices (Bluetooth beacons, cameras, and smart
meters) because they are popular data collection devices
 in smart buildings and they collect personal
data about individuals. Our goal is to study how the
perceptions of data collection and notification preferences
 differ across scenarios. We randomly assigned
the participants into three groups. Each group was
presented with one of the three scenarios below 
 Scenario 1 (Bluetooth beacons)  Suppose your
employer installs Bluetooth beacons (devices that
wirelessly broadcast a unique identifier to nearby
electronic devices) at your workplace. These beacons
 are used to collect location and movement
information to understand how the space is used.)
 Scenario 2 (Cameras)  Suppose your employer installs
 video surveillance cameras at your workplace
that collect photo/video footage to ensure workplace
 security.
 Scenario 3 (Smart meters)  Suppose your employer
installs smart meters at your workplace that collect
data about human activities and resource usage
(e.g., energy consumption, bathroom usage) to
monitor and optimize the resource consumption.
 Questions about participants  perception of data collections
 (answering RQ1)  After presenting the scenario
 descriptions, we asked the participants about
their perceptions of data access. In particular, they
were asked to select from a list of entities that
could potentially (e.g., building manager, supervisor,
government, etc.) have access to data about them,
who they are comfortable with, who they think will
benefit from having access to this data, and select/add
what purposes they think the data might be used
for. We further reused the aforementioned series of
notification preferences questions to understand their
preferences specifically for the presented scenario.
 Post-scenario questions about participants  privacy
notification preferences (answering RQ2)  We repeat
the questions about privacy notification preferences
in the pre-scenario section to check if users  preferences
 would be different for specific scenarios.
 Demographics  Finally, we asked our participants a
set of demographic questions, including gender, age,
education, and income.
3.4. Data Analysis
Our data includes multiple-choice (only 1 choice can
be selected), multiple-response (multiple choices can be
selected), 5-point Likert scale, and free-text data types. We
used Chi-square test (for categorical data) and KruskalWallis
 H test (for Likert scale data) to quantitatively
analyze the responses across 3 scenario groups. We also
conducted follow-up Bonferroni post-hoc tests for identifying
 statistical significance from pair-wise comparisons.For multiple-response questions, we coded each item
into its variable holding a Yes or No value. Yes value
means the participant selected the item and No means
otherwise. We then treated these new variables similarly
to those of multiple-choice questions.
For free-text responses, 4 researchers in our group
independently coded a subset of the qualitative data. We
first developed and agreed on a code book to capture
the themes. We then used this codebook to code the
data independently. Each entry in the dataset was coded
by 2 researchers. After finishing independent coding, we
discussed the codes as a group to resolve conflicts and
finalize the codes.
3.5. Ethical Considerations
We worked closely with our Institutional Review
Board (IRB) and iteratively updated our study protocol.
Our protocol did not receive any obligations or constraints
from the IRB. Before the study, we asked the participants
to read our consent form carefully and sign it to participate
in the study. Participation in our study was voluntary and
anonymous. When collecting the data, we did not collect
any personally identifiable information except for their
Prolific ID (a randomly-generated string of numbers and
letters) for payment purposes. All data was securely stored
and could only be accessed by the research team. Our
survey instrument is attached in Appendix B.
4. Results
This section presents our findings from the user study
and how they answer our research questions.
4.1. Overview
Our study contributes to a new understanding of people s
 awareness, perceptions, and notification preferences
of IoT devices and the associated data collection behaviors
in commercial smart buildings. In general, we found that
about half of the participants reported being aware of
the data collection by IoT devices at their workplaces
while the other half were unaware. However, we observed
variances among participants  perceptions regarding who
may access their data, whether they are comfortable with
their data being accessed, and who might benefit from
their data.
Furthermore, we also unpacked our participants  preferences
 on whether they would like to receive notification
about their data collection, and if so, what information
they would like to know and how they want to be notified.
Our results highlight the need for notifications as over
90% of our participants want to be notified. However,
they have different expectations of the notification content
and modality, suggesting the need for context- and devicedependent
 notification mechanisms.
Our study also suggested a few factors that could
influence participants  preferences of what and how notifications
 should be delivered. For example, participants
who were aware of the IoT devices  data collection would
prefer to know how their collected data is used.
In the remainder of this section, we first summarize the
demographics and backgrounds of our study participants,then we present our detailed findings based on the three
research questions we listed.
4.2. Participants
Screening and validation  We received 800 responses
from our screening. 597 participants qualified for our
screening and received our invitation to the study. Eventually,
 we received 564 responses for our main survey. We
filtered out invalid responses such as incomplete responses
(including meaningless ones that the participant entered
only white spaces into all free-text answer boxes), and
responses that failed our attention checks. As a result,
we removed 8 invalid responses from our dataset. These
removed responses include 6 duplicates and 2 attentioncheck
 fails.
Considering participants whose workplace has IoT
devices  As our study focuses on occupants in smart
commercial buildings, we asked the participants to report
what devices they noticed at their workplace. We included
the  None  answer to filter out participants who had no
experience with IoT devices at all. We excluded 64 such
responses from our dataset. Our final dataset includes
responses from 492 participants.
Responses Percentage
Gender
Male 276 56.1%
Female 208 42.3%
Non-binary 7 1.4%
Prefer not to answer 1  1%
Age
18 - 24 95 19.3%
25 - 34 226 45.9%
35 - 44 118 24%
45 - 54 35 7.1%
55 - 64 14 2.8%
65 and above 4  1%
Education
Some high school 2  1%
High school graduate 36 7.3%
Some college 87 17.7%
Associate s degree 40 8.1%
Bachelor s degree 207 42.1%
Graduate degree 117 23.8%
Prefer not to answer 3  1%
Annual personal income
Less than $10,000 42 8.5%
10,000 24,999 75 15.2%
25,000 49,999 125 25.4%
50,000 74,999 103 20.9%
75,000 99,999 55 11.2%
100,000 149,999 48 9.8%
$150,000 and greater 33 6.7%
Prefer not to answer 11 2.2%
TABLE 1. D EMOGRAPHIC INFORMATION (GENDER ,AGE,
EDUCATION ,AND ANNUAL PERSONAL INCOME BEFORE TAXES )OF
THE PARTICIPANTS IN OUR SAMPLE .
Demographic background  Among the 492 participants,
 56.1% are male, 42.3% are female, and less than
2% non-binary. Our participants skewed towards young
(45.9% are between 25 and 34), highly educated (42.1%
have Bachelor s degree) people in the middle socioeconomic
 class (46.3% have income between $25,000 and
$74,999). Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics about
the demographic background of our participants.Regarding the background of IoT technologies in general,
 over 60% of our participants indicated a good level
of confidence (i.e., above a rating of 3) with the IoT
technologies (e.g., voice assistants, smart security cameras,
 smartwatches, virtual reality, etc.). Most participants
reported that they have an average (34.96%) and aboveaverage
 (40.04%) understanding of IoT technologies.
In Appendix A, we present additional details about
participants  level of confidence with the IoT technologies
and participants  understanding of the IoT technologies
(Figure 5 and Figure 6).
4.3. Perceptions of Data Collection in Smart
Commercial Building (RQ1)
Our goal is to understand occupants  perceptions of
data collection in smart commercial buildings, identifying
potential gaps between occupants  perceptions and the IoT
data collection transparency. Our data suggested that the
participants reported different levels of understanding in
terms of the types of data collection at their workplaces.
There is a discrepancy between what people think about
IoT data collection and what it actually is.
4.3.1. Awareness of data collection. First, we want to
understand if the occupants know of the data collection
happening and what kinds of IoT devices they noticed
at their workplace. 52.44% of participants reported being
aware of the data collection at their workplace while the
other 47.56% reported being unaware. We asked what
devices they noticed at their workplace. Cameras were the
most popular device (selected by 76.83% of participants)
that they noticed at their workplace. Among different sensors,
 most of our participants reported noticing temperature
 sensors, while the energy sensor was the least noticed
one. Figure 2 shows the percentage of responses for what
devices the participants noticed at their workplace.
Figure 2. Participants  responses to what devices they notice at their
workplace.Takeaway 1   Even though people notice IoT devices
at their workplace, they are not aware of these devices
collecting data. Cameras are the most popular devices
that people notice at their workplaces. This indicates
that the camera s presences are very obvious to many
occupants in a smart commercial building setting. We
later present findings about occupants  perceptions and
notification preferences of the camera s data collection
scenario as compared to two other less obvious scenarios
(i.e., Bluetooth beacon and smart meter).
4.3.2. Perceptions of data access. We further unpack
people s perceptions of data collection from the following
three perspectives  (1) who do you think will have access
to your data, (2) who are you comfortable with having
access to your data, and (3) who do you think will benefit
from having access to your data. We provided a list of
entities relevant to data collection in smart buildings,
which included my building manager, my supervisor, the
government, the manufacturer of the devices, my company,
 and myself. We used Chi-square test to identify
the significant associations between the scenario and the
selection of each entity. We also conducted a Bonferroni
post-hoc analysis to identify the specific pairs of scenarios
that have a significant difference.
First, we find that the majority of participants
(94.5%) thought that their company would have access
to data about them in all 3 scenarios. A few participants
 (11%) thought that they [themselves] would have
access to their own data. We identify statistical significance
 for  My supervisor  ( p  0.002) and  The manufacturer
 of the devices  ( p  0.000) across 3 scenarios.
Specifically, for the  My supervisor  selection, our pairwise
 comparison test shows that in the Bluetooth beacon
scenario, significantly more participants thought that their
supervisor would have access to their data compared to
the smart meter scenario ( p  0.001). For the  The manufacturer
 of the devices  selection, we find a significant
difference between the camera scenario and each of the
other two scenarios, i.e., significantly fewer participants
in the camera scenario thought that the manufacturer of
the devices would have access to the data as compared to
the other 2 scenarios ( p  0.000).
Second, we find that most participants felt comfortable
 with themselves (62.4%) and their company
(53.5%) having access to their data. For the Bluetooth
 beacon and smart meter scenarios, slightly more
participants were comfortable with themselves than with
their company having access to the data. For the camera
scenario, the numbers are equal. We find statistical significance
 for  My building manager  ( p  0.005),  My
supervisor  ( p  0.027), and  The manufacturer of the
devices  ( p  0.000) across the 3 scenarios. For  My
building manager , our pair-wise comparison test shows
that significantly fewer participants in the Bluetooth beacon
 scenario felt comfortable with the building manager
having access to their data compared to the smart meter
scenario ( p  0.003). For the  My supervisor  selection,
significantly more participants in the camera scenario were
comfortable with their supervisor having access to their
data compared to the smart meter scenario ( p  0.022).
For  the manufacturer of the devices  selection, significantly
 more participants in the smart meter scenario werecomfortable with the manufacturer of the devices having
access to their data compared to the camera ( p  0.000)
and Bluetooth beacon ( p  0.001).
Lastly, when asked about who they thought would
benefit from having access to their data, most participants
 thought that their company would. Only 15.4%
of participants thought that they would benefit from
having access to their own data. We find statistical
significance for  My building manager  ( p  0.002),
 My supervisor  ( p  0.000), and  The manufacturer
of the devices  ( p  0.002). Our pair-wise comparison
test indicates the significant difference between the smart
meter and each of the other two scenarios regarding
 My building manager  (camera  p  0.003, Bluetooth
beacon  p  0.012) and  My supervisor  ( p  0.001)
selections. Noticeably more people in the smart meter
scenario thought that the building manager would benefit
from having access to the data while the percentages
were similar between the other two scenarios. In contrast,
significantly fewer people in the smart meter scenario
thought that their supervisor would benefit from having
access to the data as compared to the other two scenarios.
For the  the manufacturer of the devices  selection, we
find a significant difference between the camera and each
of the other two scenarios (smart meter  p  0.004,
Bluetooth beacon  p  0.013). Significantly fewer people
in the camera scenario thought that the manufacturer of
the devices would benefit from having access to the data.
Takeaway 2   In a smart commercial building setting,
occupants feel more comfortable with having access to
their own data over other entities. However, most people
do not think that they have access to their own data, yet
they would benefit from having access to their own data.
Besides, depending on the type of devices that collect
data, they have significantly different perceptions about
what data are collected and who will benefit from such
information. Building managers, supervisors, and the manufacturers
 of the devices are the three entities that have
significant differences in terms of occupants  perceptions
across the 3 scenarios (i.e., Bluetooth beacon, camera, and
smart meter).
4.3.3. Perceived purposes of data collection. We then
asked the participants to select the purposes for that they
think the collected data about them could be used. In
general, for all 3 scenarios,  enforcing policies  is the
most selected purpose for data collection (over 75% of
participants). This is a surprising result since most of the
time, enforcing policies is not what the collected data is
primarily used for.
Specifically, in the Bluetooth beacon scenario,  localization 
 is the least selected purpose, which is also an
interesting result because it is actually the primary usage
of Bluetooth beacons. Instead, most participants thought
 enforcing policies  (76.5%) and  user profiling  (71.6%)
were the purposes of the Bluetooth beacon s data collection.
 One participant was specifically concerned that Bluetooth
 beacons could get unauthorized access to his/her
phone   I would assume the Bluetooth beacon might also
be able to access my phone without me realizing (P272). 
These results indicate people s misconceptions and
lack of knowledge regarding the purposes of data collection
 in various contexts. Figure 3 shows the percentage ofparticipants  responses for what purposes they think the
collected data about them might be used.
Figure 3. Participants  responses to  What purposes do you think data
about you might be used for   across 3 scenarios. Enforcing policies is
the most popular selection for all 3 scenarios, which indicates the participants
 might have misconceptions about the purposes of the devices.
Takeaway 3   Interestingly, many participants may have
misunderstandings about the purposes of the data collection.
 76.5% of the participants in the Bluetooth beacon
scenario thought that its data collection is used for enforcing
 policies. Even though some participants indicated that
their understanding of IoT technologies, in general, is at
or above average, many of them still believe that the data
collection in the three scenarios is for enforcing policy
purposes instead of for the functionalities of IoT devices.
This may indicate one of the following  1) participants are
not fully aware of the purpose of different IoT devices and
they have a misunderstanding of how IoT devices work,
or 2) they do not believe that the IoT devices are utilized
for the same purposes as they are intended and designed.
Thus, it is important to inform people about data collection
purposes and data access when designing notifications.
4.4. Notification Preferences for Data Collection
in Smart Commercial Building (RQ2)
To understand participants  preferences for notifications
 in smart commercial buildings, we used the following
 questions regarding the presence of data collection 
 Do you want to be notified  Why and why not 
 What do you want to be notified about 
 How do you want to be notified 
We first asked these three questions at the beginning of the
survey to get a general overview of the participants  notification
 preferences. We then presented the hypothetical
scenarios and asked these questions again to investigate
the participants  notification preferences specifically for
the given scenario. As the participants were randomly presented
 with one of the three scenarios, we need to ensure
that the participants in the three groups have a similar level
of understanding of IoT technologies so that we can make
a comparison among these three groups. We did not find
statistically significant differences among the participants
in the three groups, indicating that participants from all
three groups have a similar level of IoT knowledge.
4.4.1. Participants  Notification Preferences. Next, we
present participants  responses to our questions regardingwhether they want to be notified about the data collection
and what information they want to know in general and in
3 scenarios. Table 2 lists all themes from the participants 
responses to why they want or do not want to be notified
about the data collection in each scenario.
General context. When asked whether they want to be
notified about the presence of the devices collecting data
about them at their workplace, the majority of participants
(90.65%) wanted to be notified and only 9.35% did not
want to be notified.
The majority of participants wanted to be aware of
the data collection. Privacy rights and the safety of the
data were also considered important to the participants.
A participant mentioned  I want to know how my information
 may be handled and if it will affect me in my
personal life or my work life (P1).  Other participants
expressed privacy concerns such as  So I don t get spied
on without knowing. And being aware of how my facial
data is processed by my employer (P9).  A participant
thought that he/she was already being spied on   I already
know they are spying on us but I would at least like to
know from where (P153). 
The few participants that did not want notifications
thought that the data collection would not affect them negatively
 or trusted whoever had access to the collected data 
 I don t think it would affect my performance (P185). ,
 Doesn t bother me much (P151). ,  Information collected
by the company is strictly official and has little or nothing
to do with my private life. This information also rests in
credible hands (P195).  Some others were confident that
they already knew how things work and that notifications
are unnecessary   I really understand how it works, I don t
need any notification on them (P138). ,  I personally don t
feel it s necessary and also me not knowing would allow
me to work and act normally (P281). 
Our data suggest 9 primary reasons why the participants
 wanted to be notified and 13 reasons why they did
not want to be notified about the data collection. For example,
 increasing awareness of data collection by nearby
smart devices remains the top reason why participants
would like to be notified (n 246). Notably, 68 participants
believed that they have privacy rights in the workplace 
as a result, they should be notified of any nearby data
collection   No matter what that is my right to be notified 
(P172),  It is one of the rights I have as an employee 
(P178), or  I believe it is unethical for a company to
record information about employees without first telling
them about and what information is collected (P196). 
For what people want to be notified about, we asked
the participants to select from a list of different options
before they saw the scenarios as well as after reading
the scenarios  the presence of data collection, purposes
for which your data can be used, how your data can be
used, for how long your data can be retained, and who
can access your data. The majority of the participants
(more than 89%) wanted to be notified about all of the
listed options. Fewer participants (78%) wanted to know
for how long their data can be retained. There were no
significant differences in participants  preferences on what
they would like to be notified about across a general
context and 3 scenarios.
Scenario 1  Bluetooth beacon. 91.36% of our participants
 wanted to be notified about the presence of thedevices collecting data while 8.64% did not. Most people
wanted to be notified of the purposes for which their
data can be used. Participants wanted to be aware of
any sensitive info that could be inferred from the data 
 That s really creepy and I don t want to be constantly
tracked (P81). ,  I don t want potentially embarrassing
info collected, like how often I use the bathroom (P261). 
Some participants mentioned that the data collection could
affect their job   The Bluetooth beacon collects some
personal data about my performance by interacting with
other devices (P198). ,  So I can decide whether or not
it s a dealbreaker for me in keeping the job (P280). 
The majority of people thought that data collected
from Bluetooth beacons would be used for enforcing policies
 and user profiling. A few participants thought that the
data could be used for micromanagement, manipulation,
profit from selling to third parties, or improving workspace
efficiency. One participant mentioned  I want to know if
my actions are being monitored in some way and have
the potential to be used against me (P1). 
When asked about who would have access to the
collected data, most people thought that their company
would have access to the collected data (95.7%) and that
their company would benefit from having the data access
(87.7%). However, the majority of people (67.9%) were
comfortable with themselves rather than their company
having access to the collected data. A participant was
worried that someone else might know their private activities 
  If my whereabouts are being tracked, I want to
know. It also prevents people from being blindsided when
they re confronted with information that they thought no
one knew about because they were alone when they were
doing it (going from A to B, spending too much time
somewhere, etc.) (P73). 
Scenario 2  Camera. 92.77% of our participants
wanted to be notified about the presence of the devices
collecting data while 7.23% did not. More people were
interested in getting notified about who can access their
data and the purposes for which their data can be used.
In contrast to the other 2 scenarios, the participants were
more concerned about their behaviors being monitored. A
few participants did not want their activities to be watched
by someone else   So I don t do something embarrassing
while I think I am alone and no one but me will ever see
or know (P429). 
The majority of participants thought that camera data
would be used for enforcing policies. One participant
said   Because if I do any mistake I will correct that
(P45).  Many participants also selected user profiling as
the purpose of using camera data. Some participants expressed
 concerns about past experience with camera data
collection   I have been through abusive periods of my
life revolving heavily around cameras (P50). 
The majority of participants (95.2%) thought that their
company would have access to the collected data. Many
people also thought their supervisor and building manager
would have access. Some mentioned the IT department
and the software provider of the camera. Most participants
were comfortable with themselves and their company
having access to the collected camera data. Surprisingly,
more participants were comfortable with their company
than themselves having access (56.6% vs 55.4%). SomeQuestion CategoriesNumber of responses
General Bluetooth beacon Camera Smart meter
Why notifiedAwareness of data collection 248 73 84 79
Privacy rights/Ethics 71 23 31 20
General concerns/curiosity 40 29 21 31
Privacy violation 38 16 13 7
Pay attention to their behavior 36 13 24 12
Ensure safety of their data 24 10 11 4
Trust/Communication/Interaction 18 20 18 8
Ownership of their own data 12 18 14 23
Understand the associated benefits 4 5 2 1
Why not notifiedNo violation/negative effects 7 1 0 1
Nothing to hide 5 2 1 1
Understand how it works 4 2 1 0
Unnecessary/Not useful 4 2 4 10
Burdensome/It will worry me more 4 1 0 3
Feel comfortable with devices around 3 0 0 1
Just don t want 3 0 2 7
Not sensitive 2 1 0 2
It makes no difference in my behavior 2 1 0 0
No control anyways 2 1 0 0
Employer s privilege 2 0 0 1
Won t get enough info 1 0 0 0
Not related to privacy 1 1 1 5
Private property 0 1 0 0
TABLE 2. C ATEGORIES OF QUALITATIVE RESPONSES REGARDING REASONS WHY THE PARTICIPANTS WANTED OR DID NOT WANT TO BE
NOTIFIED ABOUT DATA COLLECTION
mentioned that they would like to get help with loss
prevention or in case of theft occurs.
Although the participants would like to get help with
loss prevention from their company, a few thought that
they themselves would benefit from having access to the
collected data (16.9%). Significantly more participants
thought that their company would benefit from having
access to the data (86.1%).
Scenario 3  Smart meter. 81.71% of our participants
wanted to be notified about the presence of the devices
collecting data while 18.29% did not. More people were
interested in getting notified about who can access their
data and the purposes for which their data can be used.
In contrast to the other 2 scenarios, more participants
worried about the ownership of their data. Most said that it
is their right to know about their own data being collected 
 Because it s my data and it should belong to me (P241). 
or  I feel it is my right to have access to the information
that is gathered about me (P109).  Most people who did
not want to be notified thought that it is not necessary
or not useful   I feel it s of no need to enable me to
know the presence. I feel it s right to let it do its work
without myself having to feel its presence (P11).  Some
participants thought the data collection was not related
to privacy   Data based on resource consumption is not
really privacy related (P7). 
Surprisingly, enforcing policies is the purpose of using
the collected data that most participants thought. Noticeably
 fewer people selected  improving smart devices 
which is actually the main purpose of smart meter data
collection. A few people mentioned tracking resource
usage and intimidation as the purposes of using smart
meter data. Some participants expressed concerns about
being monitored   It feels like they are getting very closeto crossing that bridge of going too far for me at least.
I d like to know what they are tracking/watching if I am
an employee (P36). 
In this scenario, most participants (92.7%) thought
that their company would have access to the collected
data. A few participants (13.4%) thought that they themselves
 would have access. When asked about who they
are comfortable with having the access, more participants
selected  Myself  than  My company  (64.0% vs 45.7%)
which indicates that people preferred to have access to
their data besides the company. However, the majority
of participants (86.0%) still thought that their company
would benefit from it. One participant added that whoever
bought the collected data would benefit from it.
Takeaway 4   In general, most people (90.65% of participants)
 preferred to be notified about the presence of
the devices collecting data about them at their workplace.
Across 3 scenarios, participants  desire for notification
is consistent in Bluetooth beacon and camera scenarios.
However, about 10% fewer participants wanted to be
notified in the smart meter scenario, suggesting that fewer
people are concerned about smart meter data collection.
For all 3 scenarios, participants expressed their preference
 for notification of all information about the data
collection activity that we listed. Noticeably, participants
in the Camera scenario were more interested in knowing
whether their behaviors were being tracked, while those
in the Smart meter scenario were more interested in the
ownership of the collected data. The results indicate the
importance of transparency in data collection.
4.4.2. Participants  Notification Methods Choices.
Next, we present the participants  preferences of notification
 methods for data collection in general and in3 scenarios. Figure 4 show the percentage of what the
participants wanted to be notified about and how they
wanted to be notified, respectively for 3 scenario groups.
Figure 4. Participants  preferences for how they wanted to be notified
across 3 scenarios.
Email is the most popular choice across all scenarios
 and in general. 69% of participants selected email as
their preferred notification method. Notably, the amount of
participants who preferred Email method is significantly
larger than other methods. One participant says  I want
to be notified of how my data is being gathered via email
on a weekly basis (P113). 
Mobile App is surprisingly the least selected choice.
Only 33% of participants preferred to be notified via
mobile app. This choice has a significantly lower number
of participants as compared to email (69%), physical
sign (51%), and website (49%). Although mobile app has
been a popular method of notification [41], our finding
shows that participants do not prefer to receive mobile
app notifications for smart commercial building context.
Physical Sign is more preferred in the Bluetooth
beacon scenario and the Camera scenario. Our statistical
 test shows a significant difference for the  physical
sign  option between the smart meter scenario and the
other two scenarios ( p  0.006), as 6% fewer participants
preferred physical sign in the smart meter scenario.
In-person notification is suggested in the Bluetooth
beacon scenario and the Smart meter scenario. Other
than indirect notifications, participants in these two scenarios
 also suggested having their supervisor or people from
upper management notify them in person about the data
collection (n   5). We did not find anyone suggesting this
method in the Camera scenario. However, in the Camera
scenario, one participant suggested implementing a written
policy document.
Across different means of notification, participants
strongly preferred to be notified about the presence of
a camera. Participants  negative experiences with cameras
could cause such preference. For example, one participant
 specifically mentioned their bad past experience with
camera data collection as the reason why they wanted
notification   I have been through abusive periods of my
life revolving heavily around cameras (P50). Takeaway 5   Email and physical signs were generally the
most preferred means of notification for data collection
in smart commercial buildings. However, one-size-fits-all
should not be the strategy for notification. Fewer participants
 preferred physical signs for the smart meter scenario,
 which is significantly different from the other two
scenarios. Therefore, a flexible selection of notification
strategies (e.g., device-specific strategies) may be needed
to inform occupants about the type and purpose of data
collection by different IoT devices in smart commercial
buildings.
4.5. Potential Factors for Notification Preferences
in Smart Commercial Building (RQ3)
In this section, we discuss factors that may influence
people s notification preferences for different IoT devices
in smart buildings. Specifically, we focus on the following
 three factors  participants  awareness, confidence, and
understanding of IoT devices in smart buildings based on
participants  responses to the pre-scenario questions (i.e.,
general context).
4.5.1. Awareness of data collection. We asked the participants
 whether they were aware of the data collection
at their workplace. 52.44% reported being aware, and
47.56% reported being unaware. We further find that
91.5% within the aware group and 89.74% of participants
within the unaware group reported wanting to be notified
about the presence of data collection. This indicates that
most occupants in smart commercial buildings may have
concerns about their data being collected and thus want
to be able to keep track of the data collection activities
around them. It also confirms the importance of implementing
 notifications of data collection in commercial
buildings to provide transparency.
Our result shows that the participants do not have
significantly different notification preferences regardless
of whether they are aware or unaware of data collection
around them. However, regarding what people want to be
notified about, we observed that about 4% more participants
 in the aware group selected  How your data can
be used , while for the other choices, there are slightly
more participants (less than 4%) in the unaware group.
Regarding how people want to be notified, the response
percentage for the physical sign is similar between the
two groups. Mobile app (about 6% more participants) and
website (about 2% more participants) are more preferred
in the aware group, while email (about 7% more participants)
 and paper document (about 3% more participants)
are more preferred in the unaware group.
4.5.2. Confidence with IoT. We used a 5-point Likert
 scale question to ask about participants  confidence
levels with IoT technologies. For analysis purposes, we
categorized  1-Extremely unconfident  and  2-Somewhat
unconfident  into the unconfident group,  3-Neither confident
 nor unconfident  into the neutral group, and  4Somewhat
 confident  and  5-Extremely confident  into
the confident group. As a result, we had 16.3% (80 out
of 492) unconfident, 16.3% (80 out of 492) neutral, and
67.5% (332 out of 492) confident responses. We further
found that the majority of participants within each group(96.3% in unconfident, 92.5% in neutral, and 88.9% in
confident) wanted to be notified about the presence of
devices collecting data. This result suggests that even
though people are confident with IoT technologies in
general, they still prefer to be notified about the data
collection around them.
Regarding what people want to be notified of, we
found statistical significance ( p  0.001) for  Presence
 of data collection ,  How your data can be used 
(p  0.043),  For how long your data can be retained 
(p  0.000), and  Who can access your data  ( p  0.038).
For all of this data collection information, our pair-wise
comparison further shows a significant difference between
the confident group and the unconfident group ( p  0.002,
p  0.039,p  0.000, respectively). Across all information
 about data collection, fewer participants in the
confident group wanted to be notified as compared to the
other two groups.
Regarding how people want to be notified, we did
not find any statistical significance for the three groups.
However, we observed that slightly more participants in
the unconfident group preferred the other means of notification
 (i.e., physical sign, website, email, and paper
document) rather than mobile app. There are about 12%
more participants in the confident group for mobile app
selection than in the unconfident group.
4.5.3. Understanding of IoT. We used a 5-point Likert
 scale question to ask the participants how they
would describe their understanding of the IoT. For analysis
 purposes, we categorized  1-No understanding  and
 2-Below average  into the below-average group,  3Average 
 as the average group, and  4-Above average 
 and  5-Strong understanding  into the above-average
group. Thus, we had 6.9% (34 out of 492) below average,
35% (172 out of 492) average, and 58.1% (286 out of
492) above average. We further found that the majority
of participants within each group (97% in the belowaverage
 group, 90.1% in the average, and 90.2% in the
above-average group) wanted to be notified about the
presence of devices collecting data. This result shows that
even though people claimed to have an average or aboveaverage
 understanding of IoT technologies, they still want
notifications about the data collection around them.
Regarding what people want to be notified about,
we did not find any statistical significance for the three
groups. However, across all information about data collection,
 we observed that there were slightly more participants
 in the below-average group who wanted to be
notified. It is understandable that people with a belowaverage
 understanding of IoT may want to be notified of
more information about data collection.
Regarding how people want to be notified, we identified
 statistical significance for  mobile app  ( p  0.009)
and  email  ( p  0.021). For both of these means of
notification, our pair-wise comparison shows a significant
difference between the average group and the aboveaverage
 group ( p  0.018,p  0.049, respectively). More
participants in the above-average group preferred mobile
app for notification, while more participants in the belowaverage
 group preferred email, physical sign, and paper
document options.Takeaway 6   In smart commercial buildings, transparency
of data collection is crucial. Even if people are aware of
the data collection, are confident with IoT technologies,
or are knowledgeable about IoT, they are still more likely
to prefer receiving notifications about the data collection
activities. The less confident people are with IoT technologies,
 the more information about data collection they
want to be notified of. Regarding means of notification,
people who claim to be confident with IoT technology and
people who claim to have an above-average understanding
of IoT tend to prefer mobile app over other means. This
indicates the need for a flexible notification strategy that
considers the background of the users.
5. Discussion
In this section, we discuss the implications of privacy
regulations and how our findings inform the design and
operation of smart commercial buildings. We focus on
how to inform and notify people about the type of data
that is being collected, who may have access to their data,
and how they can be better in charge of their own data. We
further discuss the limitations of our study and potential
future work.
5.1. Policy Implications
Recent privacy regulations around the world, including
the European Union s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA),
lay the legal foundation for consumers to have control
over the use and sharing of their personal information
that businesses collect from them. Devices and systems
that collect and use personal data about smart building
occupants include  electronic access systems (such as
smart entrances for exterior access points like gates and
garages), thermostats, lighting, heating ventilation air conditioning
 (HV AC), sensors, voice recognition, and cameras.
 Businesses have to inform consumers about their data
collection practices at or before the point of collection.
Regardless of the method of collection, smart building
owners must ensure visitors and guests are presented with
clear and concise notice of the collection, use, and sharing
of their personal information.
These laws lead to the fact that more respect and
protection are being given to people s personal data, even
at a heavy cost [26]. Therefore, to truly capitalize on the
promise and benefits of smart buildings, it is not enough
to minimize the data collected and limit the purpose of the
data collection. Smart buildings need to take into account
the occupants  privacy preferences and background to
determine a respectful way to notify occupants of what
data is being collected, how the collected data is utilized,
and who has access to this data.
5.2. Key Designs to Improve Smart Building Data
Collection Transparency
We detail our insights for designing data collection
systems in smart commercial building settings as follows.
Occupants in smart commercial buildings may
be affected by legal ramifications as compared tooccupants in private smart homes. In particular, for
smart homes, the owners can agree on installing IoT
devices that collect their data and have control over them.
However, this may not apply to people working in smart
commercial buildings where there are much more complex
interactions. It could lead to the fact that these occupants
may not be aware of the data collection in the building
where they work, and even if they are aware, they may
have misunderstandings of the data collection activities.
As shown in our study results, we found that nearly
half of the participants (47.56%) were not aware of the
collection of identifiable data about them. This result indicates
 that data collection in a smart commercial building
is opaque to the occupants. The majority of participants
(90.65%) reported that they wanted to be notified about
the presence of devices collecting data about them in their
work environment. Thus, to improve the smart building
occupant experience, notifications about data collection
activities should be carefully considered when planning
to deploy IoT devices.
Occupants in smart commercial buildings also have
more concerns about their privacy as compared to those
in smart homes   For starters, in my own home I can
control what s going on regarding my own electronics. At
my job I m at the mercy of what the board/tech committee/whoever
 would make this decision, I think I at least
deserve to know how my privacy is going to be violated.
Also, all the HIPAA implications that would come with
having all or at least a large part of conversations in
the building being listened to at all times.  Some were
uncomfortable with being monitored at their workplace
and that could affect their productivity   The data seems
to be not related directly to my job, and I fear it could be
used against me at some point. It feels like every aspect
of my being is being monitored, and it does not create a
comfortable environment. The camera sensor bothers me
less than things like an energy sensor, because I know
I am not doing anything that I would not like to be on
camera, I am doing my job well. It s the random info that
makes me uncomfortable, and I wonder just what is being
done with it. 
Notifications by email is consistently the most
preferred method for the participant s preference on
how to be notified across scenario and confidence
groups. On the contrary, notification by mobile app is
one of the lowest rated methods. This result shows a very
different notification preference as compared to a smart
home environment where people preferred mobile app
notification the most [41]. Although notification by email
is preferred in the smart commercial building context, it is
important to note that email notification is only practical
in scenarios where all data subjects can have their email
addresses registered for notifications.
We suspect that the amount of user effort involved in
receiving notifications is one of the deciding factors in the
smart commercial building context. For example, emails
require the least amount of user effort in the professional
context, given that email is the most common way of
communication at work. Similarly, physical signs, websites,
 or paper documents likely will not require the users
to actively do anything to subscribe to the notifications.
However, to receive notifications through a mobile app,users need to rely on an additional device, and installing
an app also takes some effort.
In terms of what to notify the occupants, people
seem to be less interested in  1) data collected by
smart meters, and 2) the duration with which data
is retained. These results indicate that if a designer is
looking to reduce fatigue by minimizing the amount of
information in the notification, information about sensors
similar to smart meters and duration information can be
the first candidates to eliminate. When looking at the types
of users, we found that factors such as confidence about
IoT and IoT knowledge impact users  privacy notification
preferences in different data collection scenarios. These
results indicate that a notification system can likely take
advantage of a user s self-reported understanding and
confidence of IoTs to tailor the notification rate for privacy
updates and changes.
People consider certain locations in the building
(e.g., bathrooms) as private spaces where data should
not be collected. Some participants mentioned that they
do not want to be recognized while using the bathroom
as there is no privacy. Even in the smart meter scenario,
participants were okay with water use tracking but were
hesitant about collecting data in private areas. Some participants
 in this scenario mentioned that water usage is
not so much of a big deal, but they do not like the
idea of someone keeping track of their bathroom usage.
They further explained that it would be embarrassing if
a supervisor or manager came by and questioned their
usage. These results might indicate that smart building
managers should consider setting different policies for
data collection in public, semi-public, and private spaces
in smart buildings.
It is important for smart buildings to create a
fiduciary relationship with their occupants by aligning
interests. Our findings (Section 4.3.2) indicate that many
occupants feel the IoT data collection in smart buildings
benefits others (e.g., building managers, employers) more
than themselves, which may lead to common negative
perceptions or misconceptions around unwanted surveillance.
 Although some of our participants recognized the
potential personal benefits of such IoT data collection, it
is not currently feasible for them to take full advantage of
the data being collected. To improve the acceptance and
resolve potential privacy concerns, it is critical for smart
building managers to create a fiduciary relationship with
occupants by aligning the interests of both parties.
We recommend that smart buildings should ensure
occupants are aware of their personal benefits from various
IoT data collection, which could be conveyed through
effective privacy notifications in occupants  preferred formats.
 Also, necessary software infrastructure (e.g., APIs)
that enables occupants to access and take advantage of
certain collected IoT data for their personal benefits will
contribute to building such a fiduciary relationship.
5.3. Limitations and Future Work
Our study has some limitations. First, our results rely
on participants  self-reported data. To mitigate the bias,
we cross-checked participants  answers throughout the
survey to ensure their responses were consistent, indicating
 a satisfactory level of trustworthiness regarding theirpreferences. Second, we used hypothetical scenarios in
our study to prompt participants  preferences, and the
preferences can vary based on context. Third, some of our
participants may not have experience with smart buildings
based on our definition. However, it is worth noting that
in the survey, we asked whether participants had seen
any smart devices in their building. The results indicated
that the majority of our participants came across some
IoT devices at their workplaces. Lastly, some participants
may be biased due to the same questions regarding their
preferences before and after we presented the scenarios.
Our study in this paper focuses on smart commercial
 building occupants in the US. However, as more
countries and regions deploy smart building technology
in real-world settings, future studies can consider crosscultural
 perspectives. For example, our finding regarding
occupants  perceptions of data access can be further extended
 to identify the differences based on different work
cultures and regulations. Additionally, future work can
potentially do a field study to further explore people s
notification preferences in real smart building settings that
consider different contexts. It is also interesting to explore
workplace monitoring or tension between employees and
employers. Some small-scale interviews or case studies
at different types of smart building workplaces would be
ideal to collect such data.
Our study is the necessary step toward designing a
more effective data collection and disclosure scheme for
smart buildings. Future research can look into building
personalized notification systems for data collection in
smart buildings. However, a complex multi-stakeholder
environment could be a big challenge to deploying such
personalized systems. Thus, exploring the complex relationships
 and potential conflicts between different stakeholders
 in the smart building context is also important.
6. Conclusion
Smart buildings and their applications are becoming
more popular in urban areas around the world. They
increasingly adopt IoT technologies to manage their resources
 and services. Large deployments of interconnected
sensors, actuators, and smart devices in smart buildings
improve productivity and user experience across application
 domains. However, this means pervasive, multimodal,
 continuous, and scalable data collection in such a
semi-public space. This is also an underexplored domain.
Therefore, our goal in this study is to understand the
occupants  perceptions of data collection and their notification
 preferences for different data collection scenarios in
smart commercial buildings. We conduct a user study with
492 participants who are occupants of smart commercial
buildings. Our analysis results show that many participants
(47.56%) are unaware of the data collection, and email is,
in general, the most preferred means of notification. We
also find that people have different preferences for notifications
 when they face different data collection scenarios.
Our findings will help guide the design and implementation
 of privacy-related notifications in smart buildings and
increase occupants  awareness of the nearby data collection.
 In the bigger picture, future smart cities can use the
insights from this research to develop privacy-respecting
infrastructure and effective notification schemes.Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) Secure and Trustworthy Computing
 program (Grants CNS-1801316, CNS-2320903).
Other grants supporting this research included NSF CNS
2114074, NSF OAC 2002985, NSF CNS 1943100, NSF
OAC 1920462, NSF CNS 2323105, and Google Research
Scholar Award. The US Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute reprints for Governmental purposes,
 notwithstanding any copyright notices thereon. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the official policies or endorsements, either expressed or
implied of the US Government or other funding agencies.
This research was also partially funded by an internal
grant at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County.
We thank Clay Ford from UV A Stat Lab for providing
statistical consulting and UV A Link Lab for providing
feedback on the study design. We also thank our shepherd
and anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments
on this research.
References
[1] A survey on iot platforms  Communication, security, and privacy
perspectives. Computer Networks, 192, June 2021.
[2] Abbas Acar, Hossein Fereidooni, Tigist Abera, Amit Kumar Sikder,
Markus Miettinen, Hidayet Aksu, Mauro Conti, Ahmad-Reza
Sadeghi, and Selcuk Uluagac. Peek-a-boo  I see your smart
home activities, even encrypted  In Proceedings ofthe13th
ACM Conference onSecurity andPrivacy inWireless andMobile
Networks, WiSec  20, page 207 218, New York, NY , USA, 2020.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[3] Joseph G Allen and John D Macomber. Healthy buildings  How
indoor spaces drive performance andproductivity. Harvard University
 Press, 2020.
[4] Noah Apthorpe, Yan Shvartzshnaider, Arunesh Mathur, Dillon
Reisman, and Nick Feamster. Discovering smart home internet
of things privacy norms using contextual integrity. 2(2), jul 2018.
[5] Leonardo Babun, Z. Berkay Celik, Patrick McDaniel, and A. Selcuk
 Uluagac. Real-time analysis of privacy-(un)aware iot applications.
 Proceedings onPrivacy Enhancing Technologies,
2021(1) 145 166, 2021.
[6] Nat  a Miccael Barbosa, Joon Sung Park, Yaxing Yao, and Yang
Wang.  what if   predicting individual users  smart home privacy
preferences and their changes. Proceedings onPrivacy Enhancing
Technologies, 2019 211   231, 2019.
[7] Matthias Caesar and Jan Steffan. A location privacy analysis of
bluetooth mesh. Journal ofInformation Security andApplications,
54 102563, 2020.
[8] Stephan Cejka, Felix Knorr, and Florian Kintzler. Privacy issues
in smart buildings by examples in smart metering. 2019.
[9] Hanbyul Choi, Jonghwa Park, and Yoonhyuk Jung. The role of
privacy fatigue in online privacy behavior. Computers inHuman
Behavior, 81 42 51, 2018.
[10] CookieYes. Gdpr cookie consent banner examples, November
2019.
[11] Council of European Union. General data protection regulation.
https //gdpr-infor .eu, 2016.
[12] Lorrie Faith Cranor. Necessary but not sufficient  Standardized
mechanisms for privacy notice and choice. J.onTelecomm. &
High Tech. L., 10 273, 2012.
[13] Stefany Cruz, Logan Danek, Shinan Liu, Christopher Kraemer,
Zixin Wang, Nick Feamster, Danny Yuxing Huang, Yaxing Yao,
and Josiah Hester. Augmented reality s potential for identifying and
mitigating home privacy leaks. arXiv preprint arXiv 2301.11998,
2023.[14] Anupam Das, Martin Degeling, Daniel Smullen, and Norman
Sadeh. Personalized privacy assistants for the internet of
things  Providing users with notice and choice. IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 17(3) 35 46, 2018.
[15] Abe Davis, Michael Rubinstein, Neal Wadhwa, Gautham J Mysore,
Fredo Durand, and William T Freeman. The visual microphone 
Passive recovery of sound from video. 2014.
[16] Nico Ebert, Kurt Alexander Ackermann, and Bj  orn Scheppler.
Bolder is better  Raising user awareness through salient and concise
privacy notices. In Proceedings ofthe2021 CHI Conference on
Human Factors inComputing Systems, pages 1 12, 2021.
[17] Pardis Emami-Naeini, Yuvraj Agarwal, Lorrie Faith Cranor, and
Hanan Hibshi. Ask the experts  What should be on an iot privacy
and security label  In 2020 IEEE Symposium onSecurity and
Privacy (SP), pages 447 464. IEEE, 2020.
[18] Pardis Emami Naeini, Martin Degeling, Lujo Bauer, Richard Chow,
Lorrie Faith Cranor, Mohammad Reza Haghighat, and Heather
Patterson. The influence of friends and experts on privacy decision
making in iot scenarios. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact.,
2(CSCW), November 2018.
[19] Yuanyuan Feng, Yaxing Yao, and Norman Sadeh. A design space
for privacy choices  Towards meaningful privacy control in the
internet of things. In Proceedings ofthe2021 CHI Conference on
Human Factors inComputing Systems, pages 1 16, 2021.
[20] MG Figueiro, B Steverson, J Heerwagen, R Yucel, C Roohan,
L Sahin, K Kampschroer, and MS Rea. Light, entrainment and
alertness  A case study in offices. Lighting Research &Technology,
52(6) 736 750, 2020.
[21] Michelle Goddard. The eu general data protection regulation
(gdpr)  European regulation that has a global impact. International
Journal ofMarket Research, 59(6) 703 705, 2017.
[22] Eric Goldman. An introduction to the california consumer privacy
act (ccpa). Santa Clara Univ. Legal Studies Research Paper, 2020.
[23] Scott Harper, Maryam Mehrnezhad, and John Mace. User privacy
concerns in commercial smart buildings. Journal ofComputer
Security, (Preprint) 1 33, 2022.
[24] Danny Yuxing Huang, Noah Apthorpe, Frank Li, Gunes Acar,
and Nick Feamster. Iot inspector  Crowdsourcing labeled network
traffic from smart home devices at scale. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob.
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 4(2), jun 2020.
[25] Farrokh Jazizadeh, Burcin Becerik-Gerber, Mario Berges, and Lucio
 Soibelman. An unsupervised hierarchical clustering based
heuristic algorithm for facilitated training of electricity consumption
 disaggregation systems. Advanced Engineering Informatics,
28(4) 311 326, 2014.
[26] Jennifer Huddleston. The price of privacy  The impact
of strict data regulations on innovation and more. https 
//www .americanactionforum .org/insight/the-price-of-privacy-theimpact-of-strict-data-regulations-on-innovation-and-more/,
 2021.
[27] Haojian Jin, Boyuan Guo, Rituparna Roychoudhury, Yaxing Yao,
Swarun Kumar, Yuvraj Agarwal, and Jason I Hong. Exploring the
needs of users for supporting privacy-protective behaviors in smart
homes. In Proceedings ofthe2022 CHI Conference onHuman
Factors inComputing Systems, pages 1 19, 2022.
[28] Heather Richter Lipford, Madiha Tabassum, Paritosh Bahirat, Yaxing
 Yao, and Bart P Knijnenburg. Privacy and the internet of things.
Modern Socio-Technical Perspectives onPrivacy, page 233, 2022.
[29] Jiakang Lu, Tamim Sookoor, Vijay Srinivasan, Ge Gao, Brian Holben,
 John Stankovic, Eric Field, and Kamin Whitehouse. The smart
thermostat  using occupancy sensors to save energy in homes. In
Proceedings ofthe8thACM conference onembedded networked
sensor systems, pages 211 224, 2010.
[30] Pardis Emami Naeini, Sruti Bhagavatula, Hana Habib, Martin
Degeling, Lujo Bauer, Lorrie Faith Cranor, and Norman Sadeh.
Privacy expectations and preferences in an iot world. In Thirteenth
Symposium onUsable Privacy andSecurity (SOUPS 2017), pages
399 412, Santa Clara, CA, July 2017. USENIX Association.
[31] Anne Oeldorf-Hirsch and Jonathan A Obar. Overwhelming, important,
 irrelevant  Terms of service and privacy policy reading among
older adults. In Proceedings ofthe10th International Conference
onSocial Media andSociety, pages 166 173, 2019.[32] Office of the California Attorney General. California
consumer privacy act (ccpa)  First modified regulations.
https //oag .ca.gov/sites/all/files/agweb/pdfs/privacy/ccpa-textof-mod-clean-020720
 .pdf, 2020.
[33] Primal Pappachan, Martin Degeling, Roberto Yus, Anupam Das,
Sruti Bhagavatula, William Melicher, Pardis Emami Naeini,
Shikun Zhang, Lujo Bauer, Alfred Kobsa, Sharad Mehrotra, Norman
 Sadeh, and Nalini Venkatasubramanian. Towards privacyaware
 smart buildings  Capturing, communicating, and enforcing
 privacy policies and preferences. In 2017 IEEE 37th
International Conference onDistributed Computing Systems
Workshops (ICDCSW), pages 193 198, 2017.
[34] Stanley Presser, Mick P. Couper, Judith T. Lessler, Elizabeth Martin,
 Jean Martin, Jennifer M. Rothgeb, and Eleanor Singer. Methods
forTesting andEvaluating Survey Questions, chapter 1, pages 1 
22. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2004.
[35] Jingjing Ren, Daniel J. Dubois, David Choffnes, Anna Maria
Mandalari, Roman Kolcun, and Hamed Haddadi. Information
exposure from consumer iot devices  A multidimensional, networkinformed
 measurement approach. In Proceedings oftheInternet
Measurement Conference, IMC  19, page 267 279, New York, NY ,
USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[36] Luis Puche Rondon, Leonardo Babun, Ahmet Aris, Kemal Akkaya,
and A. Selcuk Uluagac. Survey on enterprise internet-of-things
systems (e-iot)  A security perspective, 2021.
[37] Luis Puche Rondon, Leonardo Babun, Ahmet Aris, Kemal Akkaya,
and Arif Selcuk Uluagac. Poisonivy  (in)secure practices of enterprise
 iot systems in smart buildings. Proceedings ofthe7th
ACM International Conference onSystems forEnergy-Efficient
Buildings, Cities, andTransportation, 2020.
[38] Michael Rubinstein et al. Analysis andvisualization oftemporal
variations invideo. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
 2014.
[39] Florian Schaub, Rebecca Balebako, Adam L Durity, and Lorrie
 Faith Cranor. A design space for effective privacy notices. In
Eleventh Symposium OnUsable Privacy andSecurity ({SOUPS }
2015), pages 1 17, 2015.
[40] Amit Kumar Sikder, Leonardo Babun, Z. Berkay Celik, Abbas
 Acar, Hidayet Aksu, Patrick Mcdaniel, Engin Kirda, and
Arif Selcuk Uluagac. Kratos  multi-user multi-device-aware access
control system for the smart home. Proceedings ofthe13th
ACM Conference onSecurity andPrivacy inWireless andMobile
Networks, 2020.
[41] Parth Kirankumar Thakkar, Shijing He, Shiyu Xu, Danny Yuxing
Huang, and Yaxing Yao.  it would probably turn into a social
faux-pas   Users  and bystanders  preferences of privacy awareness
mechanisms in smart homes. In CHI Conference onHuman Factors
inComputing Systems, pages 1 13, 2022.
[42] Lev Velykoivanenko, Kavous Salehzadeh Niksirat, No  e Zufferey,
Mathias Humbert, K  evin Huguenin, and Mauro Cherubini. Are
those steps worth your privacy  fitness-tracker users  perceptions of
privacy and utility. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol., 5(4), dec 2022.
[43] Alexandra V oit, Dominik Weber, Yomna Abdelrahman, Marie
Salm, Pawe W. Wo  zniak, Katrin Wolf, Stefan Schneegass, and
Niels Henze. Exploring non-urgent smart home notifications using
a smart plant system. In 19th International Conference onMobile
and Ubiquitous Multimedia, MUM  20, page 47 58, New York,
NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[44] Andreas Wagner, William O Brien, and Bing Dong. Exploring
occupant behavior in buildings. Wagner, A.,O Brien, W.,Dong,
B.,Eds, 2018.
[45] Tong Wu, Murtadha Aldeer, Tahiya Chowdhury, Amber Haynes,
Fateme Nikseresht, Mahsa Pahlavikhah Varnosfaderani, Jiechao
Gao, Arsalan Heydarian, Brad Campbell, and Jorge Ortiz. The
smart building privacy challenge. In Proceedings ofthe8th
ACM International Conference onSystems forEnergy-Efficient
Buildings, Cities, andTransportation, pages 238 239, 2021.
[46] Yaxing Yao, Justin Reed Basdeo, Smirity Kaushik, and Yang Wang.
Defending my castle  A co-design study of privacy mechanisms for
smart homes. In Proceedings ofthe2019 chiconference onhuman
factors incomputing systems, pages 1 12, 2019.[47] Yaxing Yao, Justin Reed Basdeo, Oriana Rosata Mcdonough, and
Yang Wang. Privacy perceptions and designs of bystanders in smart
homes. Proceedings oftheACM onHuman-Computer Interaction,
3(CSCW) 1 24, 2019.
[48] Shikun Zhang, Yuanyuan Feng, Lujo Bauer, Lorrie Faith Cranor,
Anupam Das, and Norman Sadeh.  did you know this camera
tracks your mood    Understanding privacy expectations and preferences
 in the age of video analytics. Proceedings onPrivacy
Enhancing Technologies, 2021(2) 282 304, 2021.
[49] Shikun Zhang, Yuanyuan Feng, and Norman Sadeh. Facial recognition 
 Understanding privacy concerns and attitudes across increasingly
 diverse deployment scenarios. In Seventeenth Symposium
onUsable Privacy andSecurity (SOUPS 2021), pages 243 262,
2021.
A. Background Details of Participants
In Figure 5 and Figure 6, we show participants  level
of confidence with the IoT technologies and participants 
understanding of the IoT technologies, respectively.
Figure 5. Participants  level of confidence with the IoT technologies on
a 5-likert scale (1-Extremely unconfident to 5-Extremely confident).
Figure 6. Participants  understanding of the IoT technologies on a 5likert
 scale (1-No understanding to 5-Strong understanding).B. Survey Instrument
B.1. Screening
1. Which of the following working environments
best describe where you have worked in or are
currently working in  (Choose all that apply)
2I work from home
2I have a private office to myself
2I share a private office with some colleagues
2I work in an open workspace with a designated
desk
2I work in an open workspace without a designated
 desk
2I work outdoors
2I work in a retail/service sector (e.g., restaurants,
retail stores, grocery stores)
2Other 
B.2. Main Survey
  Background and Awareness Questions  
2. What devices do you notice at your workplace 
(Choose all that apply)
2Camera
2Motion sensor
2Energy sensor
2Water sensor
2Light sensor
2Temperature sensor
2Smart TV
2Smart speaker
2Other 
2None
3. Are you aware of the devices  data collections
at your workplace 
2Yes
2No
  Perception of Data Collection Questions  
 Scenario 1 (Bluetooth beacons)  Suppose your employer
 installs Bluetooth beacons (devices that wirelessly
 broadcast a unique identifier to nearby electronic
 devices) at your workplace. These beacons are
used to collect location and movement information
to understand how the space is being used.)
 Scenario 2 (Cameras)  Suppose your employer installs
 video surveillance cameras at your workplace
that collect photo/video footage to ensure workplace
security.
 Scenario 3 (Smart meters)  Suppose your employer
installs smart meters at your workplace that collect
data about human activities and resource usage (e.g.,
energy consumption, bathroom usage) to monitor and
optimize the building s resource consumption.
4. In the scenario, who do you think will have
access to the collected data about you  (Choose
all that apply)
2My building manager
2My supervisor
2The government
2The manufacturer of the devices2My company
2Myself
2Other 
5. In the scenario, who are you comfortable with
having access to the collected data about you 
(Choose all that apply)
2My building manager
2My supervisor
2The government
2The manufacturer of the devices
2My company
2Myself
2Other 
6. In the scenario, who do you think will benefit
from having access to the collected data about
you  (Choose all that apply)
2My building manager
2My supervisor
2The government
2The manufacturer of the devices
2My company
2Myself
2Other 
7. In the scenario, which of the following purposes
do you think the collected data about you might
be used for  (Choose all that apply)
2User profiling
2Localization
2Enforcing policies
2Improving smart devices
2Other 
2None
  Notification Preferences Questions  
Note that for post-scenario, we replace  at your workplace 
 with  in the scenario  to apply the context.
8. Do you want to be notified about the presence
of the devices collecting data about you at your
workplace 
2Yes
2No
9. Please briefly explain why you want (or why you
don t want) to be notified 
10. At your workplace, which of the following do
you want to be notified about  (Choose all that
apply)
2Presence of data collection (including types of
data being collected)
2Purposes for which your data can be used
2How your data can be used
2For how long your data can be retained
2Who can access your data
2None of the above
11. How do you want to be notified  (Choose all
that apply)
2Physical sign
2Mobile app
2Website
2Email
2Paper document
2Other   Demographic Information  
12. With which gender identity do you most identify 

2Male
2Female
2Other 
2Prefer not to answer
13. What is your age group 
218 - 24 years old
225 - 34 years old
235 - 44 years old
245 - 54 years old
255 - 64 years old
265 - 74 years old
275 years or older
2Prefer not to answer
14. What is the highest level of education you have
completed 
2Some high school
2High school graduate
2Some college
2Associate s degree (2-year college)
2Bachelor s degree (4-year college)
2Graduate degree (Masters, PhD, MD, JD, etc.)
2Other 
2Prefer not to answer
15. What is your annual personal income before
taxes (USD) 
2Less than $10,000
2$10,000 - $24,999
2$25,000 - $49,999
2$50,000 - $74,999
2$75,000 - $99,999
2$100,000 - $149,999
2$150,000 and greater
2Prefer not to answer
  Confidence and Understanding  
16. How confident are you with the Internet of
Things technologies in general (e.g., voice assistants,
 smart security camera, drones, smart
watches, virtual reality glass, etc.) 
2Extremely unconfident
2Somewhat unconfident
2Neither confident nor unconfident
2Somewhat confident
2Extremely confident
17. How would you describe your understanding of
the Internet of Things 
2No understanding
2Below average
2Average
2Above average
2Strong understanding