MusicLDM  Enhancing Novelty in Text-to-Music
Generation Using Beat-Synchronous Mixup Strategies
Ke Chen1 2 3 4
Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick Shlomo Dubnov1 1 2Mila, Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Université de Montréal
3Centre for Vision Speech and Signal Processing, University of Surrey
4LAION
Abstract
Diffusion models have shown promising results in cross-modal generation tasks,
including text-to-image and text-to-audio generation.. However, generating music,
as a special type of audio, presents unique challenges due to limited availability of
music data and sensitive issues related to copyright and plagiarism. In this paper,
to tackle these challenges, we first construct a state-of-the-art text-to-music model,
MusicLDM, that adapts Stable Diffusion and AudioLDM architectures to the music
domain. We achieve this by retraining the contrastive language-audio pretraining
model (CLAP) and the Hifi-GAN vocoder, as components of MusicLDM, on a
collection of music data samples. Then, to address the limitations of training
data and to avoid plagiarism, we leverage a beat tracking model and propose two
different mixup strategies for data augmentation  beat-synchronous audio mixup
and beat-synchronous latent mixup, which recombine training audio directly or
via a latent embeddings space, respectively. Such mixup strategies encourage the
model to interpolate between musical training samples and generate new music
within the convex hull of the training data, making the generated music more
diverse while still staying faithful to the corresponding style. In addition to popular
evaluation metrics, we design several new evaluation metrics based on CLAP
score to demonstrate that our proposed MusicLDM and beat-synchronous mixup
strategies improve both the quality and novelty of generated music, as well as the
correspondence between input text and generated music.
1 Introduction
Text-guided generation tasks have gained increasing attention in recent years and have been applied
to various modailties, including text-to-image, text-to-video, and text-to-audio generation. Textto-image
 generation has been used to create both realistic and stylized images based on textual
descriptions, which can be useful in various scenarios including graphic design. Text-to-audio
generation is a relatively new, but rapidly growing area, where the goal is to generate audio pieces,
such as sound events, sound effects, and music, based on textual descriptions. Diffusion models have
shown superior performance in these types of cross-modal generation tasks, including systems like
DALLE-2 [ 29] and Stable Diffusion [ 31] for text-to-image  and AudioGen [ 22], AudioLDM [ 24],
and Make-an-Audio [16] for text-to-audio.
*The first three authors have equal contribution. Contact  Ke Chen (knutchen@ucsd.edu), Yusong Wu
(wu.yusong@mila.quebec), and Haohe Liu (haohe.liu@surrey.ac.uk)
Preprint. Under review.arXiv 2308.01546 1  [cs.SD]  3 2023As a special type of audio generation, text-to-music generation has many practical applications [ 2,7].
For instance, musicians could use text-to-music generation to quickly build samples based on specific
themes or moods and speed up their creative process. Amateur music lovers could leverage generated
pieces to learn and practice for the purpose of musical education. However, text-to-music generation
presents several specific challenges. One of the main concerns is the limited availability of text-music
parallel training data [ 1]. Compared to other modalities such as text-to-image, there are relatively
few text-music pairs available, making it difficult to train a high-quality conditional model. Large
and diverse training sets may be particularly imperative for music generation, which involves many
nuanced musical concepts, including melody, harmony, rhythm, and timbre. Further, the effectiveness
of diffusion models trained on more modest training sets has not been fully explored. Finally, a
related concern in text-to-music generation is the risk of plagiarism or lack of novelty in generated
outputs [ 1]. Music is often protected by copyright laws, and generating new music that sounds too
similar to existing music can lead to legal issues. Therefore, it is important to develop text-to-music
models that can generate novel and diverse music while avoiding plagiarism, even when trained on
relatively small training datasets.
In this paper, we focus on both these challenges  we develop a new model and training strategy
for learning to generate novel text-conditioned musical audio from limited parallel training data.
Currently, since there is no open-source model for text-to-music generation, we first construct a
state-of-the-art text-to-music generation model, MusicLDM, which adapts the Stable Diffusion [ 31]
and AudioLDM [ 24] architectures to the music domain. Next, to address the limited availability of
training data and to encourage novel generations, we adapt an idea from past work in other modalities 
mixup [ 41], which has been applied to computer vision and audio retrieval tasks, augments training
data by recombining existing training points through linear interpolation. This type of augmentation
encourages models to interpolate between training data rather than simply memorizing individual
training examples, and thus may be useful in addressing data limitations and plagiarism in music
generation. However, for music generation , the naive application of mixup is problematic. Simply
combining waveforms from two distinct musical pieces leads unnatural and ill-formed music  tempos
and beats (as well as other musical elements) are unlikely to match. Thus, we propose two novel
mixup strategies, specifically designed for music generation  beat-synchronous audio mixup (BAM)
and beat-synchronous latent mixup (BLM), which first analyze and beat-align training samples before
interpolating between audio samples directly or encoding and then interpolating in a latent space,
respectively.
We design new metrics that leverage a pretrained text and audio encoder (CLAP) to test for plagiarism
and novelty in text-to-music generation. In experiments, we find that our new beat-synchronous
mixup augmentation strategies, by encouraging the model to generate new music within the convex
hull of the training data, substantially reduce the amount of copying in generated outputs. Further, our
new model, MusicLDM, in combination with mixup, achieves better overall musical audio quality as
well as better correspondence between output audio and input text. In both automatic evaluations and
human listening tests, MusicLDM outperforms state-of-the-art models at the task of text-to-music
generation while only being trained on 9K text-music sample pairs.
Music samples and qualitative results are available at musicldm.github.io. Code and models are
available at https //github.com/RetroCirce/MusicLDM/.
2 2.1 Text-to-Audio Generation
Text-to-audio generation (TTA) [ 24,22,40] is a type of generative task that involves creating
audio content from textual input. In years past, text-to-speech (TTS) [ 30,35] achieved far better
performance than other types of audio generation. However, with the introduction of diffusion models,
superior performance in various generation tasks became more feasible. Recent work has focused
on text-guided generation in general audio, with models such as Diffsound [ 40], AudioGen [ 22],
AudioLDM [ 24], and Make-an-Audio [ 16] showing impressive results. In the domain of music,
text-to-music models include the retrieval-based MuBERT [ 26], language-model-based MusicLM
[1], diffusion-based Riffusion [ 8] and Noise Music [ 15]. However, a common issue with most recent
text-to-audio/music models is the lack of open-source training code. Additionally, music models
2audio waveform mel-spectrogram
STFT MelFB
A spectacular
dramatic trailer
corresponding textCLAP
Audio Encoder
CLAP
Text EncoderU-Net Latent Dif fusion Model
......
FiLM CocatenationVAE
DecoderVAE
Encoder
Hifi-GAN
ORFigure 1  The architecture of MusicLDM, which contains a contrastive language-audio pretraining
(CLAP) model, an audio latent diffusion model with V AE, and a Hifi-GAN nerual vocoder.
often requires large amounts of privately-owned music data that are inaccessible to the public, which
makes it difficult for researchers to reproduce and build upon their work.
Among all these models, AudioLDM is based on open-source Stable Diffusion [ 31], CLAP [ 39],
and HiFi-GAN [ 19] architectures. Therefore, we base our text-to-music generation model on the
AudioLDM architecture, to create MusicLDM for our experiments.
2.2 Plagiarism on Diffusion Models
Diffusion models have been shown to be highly effective at generating high-quality and diverse
samples for text-to-image tasks. However, a potential issue with these models is the risk of plagiarism
[33,3], or the generation novelty. As stated by [ 33], diffusion models are capable of memorizing and
combining different image objects from training images to create replicas, which can lead to highly
similar or even identical samples to the training data. [ 3] explores different methods that could extract
the training data with a generate-and-filter pipeline, showing that new advances in privacy-preserving
training of diffusion models are required. Such issues are especially concerning in the domain
of music, where copyright laws are heavily enforced and violations can result in significant legal
and financial consequences. Therefore, there is a need to develop strategies to mitigate the risk of
plagiarism in text-to-music generation using diffusion models.
2.3 Mixup on Data Augmentation
Mixup [ 41] is a widely used data augmentation technique that has shown remarkable success in
improving model generalization and mitigating overfitting. The basic principle of mixup is to linearly
combine pairs of training samples to effectively construct new samples that lie on the line connecting
the original samples in the feature space, encouraging the model to learn a more continuous and robust
decision boundary. In this paper, we explore the mixup technique in the context of text-to-music
generation based on latent diffusion models. Different from the mixup in other modalities, music
mixup involves a delicate balance of musical elements to prevent the mixed music from being chaotic
noise. Moreover, in diffusion models, mixup also can refer to the combination of latent features,
rather than music signals. We propose two mixup strategies tailored for music latent diffusion models
and explore their potential benefits for data augmentation and generation performance.
3 3.1 1, MusicLDM has similar architecture as AudioLDM  a contrastive languageaudio
 pretraining (CLAP) model [ 39], an audio latent diffusion model [ 24] with a pretrained variational
 auto-encoder (V AE) [18], and a Hifi-GAN neural vocoder [19].
Formally, given an audio waveform x RTits corresponding text, where Tis the length of samples,
we feed the data into three modules 
31.We pass xthrough the audio encoder [ 5] of CLAP faudio ( ), to obtain the semantic audio
embedding Ea
x RD, where Dis the embedding dimension.
2.We pass the text of xthrough the text encoder [ 25] of CLAP ftext( ), to to obtain the semantic
text embedding Et
x RD.
3.We transform xinto in the mel-spectrogram xmel RT F. Then we pass xmelinto the V AE
encoder, to obtain an audio latent representation y RC T
P F
P, where Tis the mel-spectrogram
frame size, Fis the number of mel bins, Cis the latent channel size of V AE, and Pis the
downsampling rate of V AE. The V AE is pretrained to learn to encoder and decode the melspectrogram
 of music data.
In MusicLDM, the latent diffusion model has a UNet architecture where each encoder or decoder
block is composed of a ResNet layer [ 11] and a spatial transformer layer [ 31]. During the training,
the semantic embedding of the input audio Exis concatenated with the latent feature of each UNet
encoder and decoder block by the FiLM mechanism [ 27]. The output of the diffusion model is the
estimated noise ϵθ(zn, n,Ex)from nto(n 1)time step in the reverse process, where θis the
parameter group of the diffusion model, and znis the n-step feature generated by the forward process.
We adopt the training objective [13, 21] as the mean square error (MSE) loss function 
Ln(θ)  Ez0,ϵ,n  ϵ ϵθ(zn, n,Ex)  2 2 (1)
where z0 yis the audio latent representation from V AE (i.e., the groundtruth), and ϵis the target
noise for training. More details regarding the training and the architecture of the latent diffusion
model can be referred in Appendix A.
For MusicLDM, we make two changes from the original AudioLDM to enhance its performance on
text-to-music generation. First, since the original contrastive language-audio pretraining (CLAP)
model is pretrained on text-audio pair datasets dominated by sound events, sound effects and natural
sounds, we retrained the CLAP on text-music pair datasets (details in Appendix B) to improve its
understanding of music data and corresponding texts. We also retrained the Hifi-GAN vocoder on
music data to ensure high-quality transforms from mel-spectrograms to music waveforms. Second,
in the original AudioLDM, the model is only fed with audio embeddings as the condition during
the training process, i.e., Ex Ea
x  and it is fed with text embeddings to perform the text-to-audio
generation, i.e., Ex Et
x. This approach leverages the alignment of text and audio embeddings
inside CLAP to train the latent diffusion model with more audio data without texts. However, this
audio-to-audio training ϵθ(zn, n,Ea
x)is essentially an approximation of the text-to-audio generation
ϵθ(zn, n,Et
x). Although CLAP is trained to learn joint embeddings for text and audio, it does not
explicitly enforce the embeddings to be distributed similarly in the latent space, which can make
it challenging for the model to generate coherent text-to-audio outputs solely with audio-to-audio
training. This problem becomes more severe when the available text-music pair data is limited.
Moreover, relying solely on audio embeddings ignores the available text data, which means that we
are not leveraging the full potential of our dataset. Consequently, generating accurate and realistic
text-to-audio generations may not be effective.
To further investigate this task, we introduce two additional training approaches for comparison 
1. Train the MusicLDM directly using the text embedding as the condition, i.e., ϵθ(zn, n,Et
x)
2.Train the MusicLDM using the audio embedding as the condition, then finetune it with text
embedding, i.e., ϵθ(zn, n,Ea
x) ϵθ(zn, n,Et
x)
The first approach follows the original target of text-to-audio, serving as a comparison with audio-toaudio
 training. The second approach is proposed as an improvement on audio-to-audio generation.
as we shift the condition distribution from the audio embedding back to the text embedding during
the training of the diffusion model. In section 4.2, we compared the above two approaches with the
original audio-to-audio training approaches to determine the best approach for generating high-quality
and highly correlated text-to-music outputs.
3.2 Beat-Synchronous Mixup
As shown in Figure 2, we propose two mixup strategies to augment the data during the MusicLDM
training  Beat-Synchronous Audio Mixup (BAM) and Beat-Synchronous Latent Mixup (BLM).
4Beat Transformer
Music Dataset
tempo
downbeat
alignmentBeat-Synchronous Audio Mix-Up
CLAP
VAEDiffusion
Model
CLAPVAE Dec.
Beat-Synchronous  Latent Mix-UpVAE
Enc.Hifi-GAN
Diffusion
ModelAudio Space
Latent Spaceaudio mix-up
latent mix-upMusic
OthersFigure 2  Mixup strategies. Left  tempo grouping and downbeat alignment via Beat Transformer.
Middle  BAM and BLM mixup strategies. Right  How BAM and BLM are applied in the feature
space of audio signals and audio latent variables.
Beat-tracking via Beat Transformer Musical compositions are made up of several elements, such
as chord progressions, timbre, and beats. Of these, beats play a crucial role in determining the musical
structure and alignment. In most audio retrieval tasks, mixup is a popular technique that involves
randomly mixing pairs of audio data to augment the training data. However, when mixing two music
samples that have different tempos (beats per minute), the mixture can be chaotic and unappealing. To
avoid this, we use a state-of-the-art beat tracking model, Beat Transformer [ 42], to extract the tempo
and downbeat map of each music track, as shown in the left of Figure 2. We categorize each music
track into different tempo groups and during training, we only mixed tracks within the same tempo
group to ensure the tracks were in similar tempos. Furthermore, we align the tracks by comparing
their downbeat maps and selecting a certain downbeat to serve as the starting position for the mixup
track. This preprocessing approach allows us to better select the music data available for mixup,
resulting in mixup tracks that are neatly ordered in terms of tempo and downbeats.
Beat-Synchronous Audio Mixup As depicted in the upper part of Figure 2, once we select two
aligned music tracks x andx2, we mix them by randomly selecting a mixing ratio from the beta
distribution λ  B(5,5), as 
x λx1  (1 λ)x2 (2)
We then use the mixed data xto obtain the CLAP embedding Exand the audio latent variable y.
We train the latent diffusion model using the standard pipeline. This beat-synchronous audio mixup
strategy is referred to as BAM.
Beat-Synchronous Latent Mixup As depicted in the lower part of Figure 2, in the latent diffusion
model, the mixup process can also be applied on the latent variables, referred as beat-synchronous
latent mixup (BLM). After selecting two aligned music tracks x andx2, we feed them into the V AE
encoder to obtain the latent variables y andy2. We then apply the mixup operation to the latent
variables 
y λy1  (1 λ)y2 (3)
In contrast to BAM, BLM applies the mixup operation to the latent space of audio, where we cannot
ensure that the mixture of the latent variables corresponds to the actual mixture of the music features
in the appearance. Therefore, we first generate a mixed mel-spectrogram xmelby feeding the mixed
latent variable yinto the V AE decoder. Then, we feed xmelto the Hifi-GAN vocoder to obtain the
mixed audio xas the input music. With xandy, we follow the pipeline to train the MusicLDM.
What are BAM and BLM doing  As shown in the right of Figure 2, we demonstrate the interpolation
 between the feature space of audio when using BAM and BLM. In the feature space of audio
signals, the "  " represents the feature point of music data, while the "  " denotes the feature point of
other audio signals, such as natural sound, audio activity, and noise. During the pretraining process
of V AE, a latent space is constructed for encoding and decoding the music data. The V AE aims to
learn the distribution of the latent variables that can best represent the original data and transform the
original feature space into a lower-dimensional manifold. This manifold is designed to capture the
5underlying structure of the music data. Therefore, any feature point within this manifold is considered
to be a valid representation of music.
BAM and BLM are concerned with augmenting the data at different levels of feature space. As shown
in right of Figure 2, BAM linearly combines two points in audio space to form a new point on the red
line. BLM, represented by the blue line, performs a similar operation, but result in a new point in the
V AE-transformed latent space, which will be decoded back onto the music manifold of audio space.
Both BAM and BLM offer unique advantages and disadvantages. BAM applies mixup in the original
feature space, resulting in a smooth interpolation between feature points. However, BAM cannot
ensure a reasonable music sample that lies within the music manifold. This issue is more problematic
using the simple audio mixup strategy without tempo and downbeat alignments. BLM, conversely,
augments within the music manifold, fostering robust and diverse latent representations. However,
BLM is computationally more expensive as it requires computing the latent feature back to audio via
V AE decoder and Hifi-GAN. Furthurmore, when the ill-defined or collapsed latent exists in V AE,
BLM may be out of effectiveness.
Both BAM and BLM are effective data augmentation techniques that encourage the model to learn
a more continuous and robust decision boundary on the audio feature space, or implicitly from the
latent space to the audio space, which can improve the model s generalization performance and
mitigate overfitting. In the context of text-to-music generation, these mixup strategies can have a
potential to mitigate the limitations of data size and help avoid plagiarism issues. By introducing
small variations through mixup, the model can touch a more rich space of music data and generate
music samples that are correlated to the texts but show differences to the original training data. In
Section 4.2, we evaluated whether these strategies mitigate the data limitation and plagiarism issues.
4 Experiments
In this section, we conducted four experiments on our proposed methods. First, we retrained a new
CLAP model to provide the condition embedding for MusicLDM. Second, we trained MusicLDM
with different mixup strategies and compared them with available baselines. Third, we evaluated
MusicLDM in terms of text-music relevance, novelty and plagiarism risk via metrics based on CLAP
scores. Finally, we conducted a subjective listening test to give an additional evaluation.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Dataset The original CLAP model trained on mostly acoustic events and sound effect datasets.
In this work, we trained a CLAP model on music datasets in addition to its original training data,
allowing it to better understand the relation between music and textual descriptions. The new CLAP
model is trained on dataset of 2.8 Million text-audio pairs, in an approximate total duration of
20 000 hours. Compared to previous CLAP model, the newly trained CLAP model performs well in
zero-shot classification for both acoustic event and music. Please refer further details on training and
performance of the new CLAP in Appendix B. For MusicLDM, we used the Audiostock dataset for
training, along with V AE and Hifi-GAN. Specifically, the Audiostock dataset contains 9000 1000 tracks for testing. The total duration is 455.6hours. It provides a correct
textual description of each music track. Although CLAP is trained on more text-music data pairs,
the large number of them are pseudo-captions composed primarily of non-specific metadata, such
as author, song title, and album information (e.g., [ a song by author A from the album B ]).
These captions do not align with our specific objective of text-to-music generation.
Hyperparameters and Training Details We trained all MusicLDM modules with music clips
of 10.24 16 kHz sampling rate. In both the V AE and diffusion model, music clips are
represented as mel-spectrograms with T  1024 128 mel-bins. Unlike AudioLDM,
MusicLDM s V AE utilizes a downsampling rate of P  8 16 . The
architecture of MusicLDM s latent diffusion model follows that of AudioLDM. The training process
of MusicLDM aligns with AudioLDM s approach. For additional hyperparameters and training
details, refer to Appendix A.
6 1  The evaluation of generation quality among MusicLDMs and baselines. AA-Train. and
TA-Train. refer to the audio-audio training scheme and the text-audio traning scheme.
Model AA-Train. TA-Train. FDpann FDvgg Inception Score  KL Div.  
Riffusion [8]     68.95 10.77 1.34 5.00
MuBERT [26]     31.70 19.04 1.51 4.69 38.92 3.08 1.67 3.65 26.67 2.40 1.81 3.80
MusicLDM (Only TA-Training)     32.40 2.51 1.49 3.96
MusicLDM w/. mixup     30.15 2.84 1.51 3.74
MusicLDM w/. BAM     28.54 2.26 1.56 3.50
MusicLDM w/. BLM     24.95 2.31 1.79 3.40
MusicLDM w/. Text-Finetune     27.81 1.75 1.76 3.60
MusicLDM w/. BAM & Text-Finetune     28.22 1.81 1.61 3.61
MusicLDM w/. BLM & Text-Finetune     26.34 1.68 1.82 3.47 4.2 4.2.1 Generation Quality
Following evaluation techniques used in past work on audio generation [ 24], we use frechet distance
(FD), inception score (IS), and kullback-leibler (KL) divergence to evaluate the quality of generated
musical audio outputs. Frechet distance evaluates the audio quality by using an audio embedding
model to measure the similarity between the embedding space of generations and that of targets. In
this paper, we use two standard audio embedding models  VGGish [ 12] and PANN [ 20]. The resulting
distances we denote as FDvggandFDpann, respectively. Inception score measures the diversity
and the quality of the full set of audio outputs, while KL divergence is measured on individual pairs
of generated and groundtruth audio samples and averaged. We use the audioldm_eval library to
evaluate all the metrics mentioned above, comparing the groundtruth audio from the Audiostock
1000-track test set with the 1000 tracks of music generated by each system based on the corresponding
textual descriptions.
Table 1 presents the FD, IS, and KL results for our models in comparison with baseline models.
In the first section, we utilized textual descriptions from the test set, sending them to the offical
APIs of Riffusion and MuBERT to generate corresponding results. Both Riffusion and MuBERT
were unable to achieve results comparable to the remaining models. Upon reviewing the generated
music from the two systems, we found that the sub-optimal performance of Riffusion resulted from
poor music generation quality, with many samples either inaudible or outside the desired musical
range. MuBERT, while generating high-quality pieces from real music sample libraries, fell short
in replicating the distribution of Audiostock dataset. Due to the unavailability of their detailed
architectures, training scripts, and data, Riffusion and MuBERT s evaluations offered only partial
comparisons.
We also retrained the original AudioLDM model on the Audiostock dataset, comparing it to MusicLDM
 variants. The distinction between AudioLDM and MusicLDM lies in the different CLAP
models used for condition embeddings. Our comparison revealed that MusicLDM outperforms
AudioLDM in terms of FDpann ,FDvgg, and IS. This underscores the efficacy of the novel CLAP
model pretrained for music, providing more suitable music embeddings as conditioning information.
Comparing MusicLDM s performance with audio-to-audio training ( ϵθ(zn, n,Exa)) and text-toaudio
 training ( ϵθ(zn, n,Ext)), denoted by  MusicLDM (Only TA-Training) , we note inferior
results in the latter approach. This may be suggests that a gap exists between distribution of text
embedding and audio embedding, making it challenging for the diffusion model to generate highquality
 audio solely from text embedding. In contrast, CLAP s audio embedding may leak low-level
audio information to the diffusion model during initial training stages, hurting the model s ability to
generalize to text embedding inputs. This hypothesis is further supported by the results of MusicLDM
with combined audio-to-audio training and text-to-audio fine-tuning. We observe a significant
decrease in FDvgg with small changes in FDpann and IS, indicating a substantial improvement
in music generation quality, driven by leveraging both audio and text embeddings during training.
The former facilitates good audio reconstruction during early training, while the latter shifts the
distribution from audio to text to align with the eventual test-time task of text-to-music generation.
1https //github.com/haoheliu/audioldm_eval
7 2  The objective metrics to measure the relevance and novelty (plagiarism). And the subjective
listening test to evaluate the quality, relevance, and musicality.
ModelObjective MetricsSubjective Listening Test
Relevance Novelty and Plagiarism Risk
Text-Audio Similarity  SIM AA@90 SIM AA@95 Quality  Relevance  Musicality  
Test Set (Ref.) 0.325          
Retrieval Max (Ref.) 0.423 0.131 0.107 0 2.02 1.50 2.33
MusicLDM (original) 0.281 0.430 0.047 1.98 2.17 2.19
MusicLDM w/. mixup 0.234 0.391 0.028      
MusicLDM w/. BAM 0.266 0.402 0.027 2.04 2.21 2.01
MusicLDM w/. BLM 0.268 0.401 0.020 2.13 2.31 2.07 1.0 0.5 0.0
MusicLDM (mix-up) MusicLDM (original) MusicLDM (BLM) MusicLDM (BAM) MuBER TText-Audio Similarity Audio-Audio Similarity
Figure 3  The violin plot of the audio-audio similarity, and the text-to-audio similarity.
Last, we compared MusicLDM with different mixup strategies, namely simple mixup [ 41], BAM,
and BLM. The comparison reveals the negative impact of the simple mixup on all metrics. This
degradation in generated sample quality, characterized by instrumental interference and noise, is
attributed to the simple mixup s inability to guarantee musicality in the mix. Similar observations
are evident in the BAM results, indicated by a drop in FDpann and IS. However, BAM s tempo
and downbeat alignment, along with the original mixup benefits, counterbalance this defect to a
certain extent, enhancing the model s generalization ability and improving certain metrics. BLM, as
a latent space mixing method, aligns with our hypothesis in Section 3.2 that latent space mixup yield
audio closely resembling music. This technique allows us to largely bypass the potential confusion
issues tied to audio mixing, thus capitalizing on mixup s ability to drive generalization and prevent
copying via data augmentation. Furthermore, incorporating text-finetuning results in a comprehensive
improvement of music generation quality, solidifying BLM as the most effective strategy.
4.2.2 Text-Audio Relevance, Novelty and Plagiarism
We proposed two metric groups, text-audio similarity andnearest-neighbor audio similarity ratio
to assess text-audio relevance, novelty, and plagiarism risk in various models.
First, text-audio similarity measures the relevance between the text and the audio. It is defined as the
dot product between the groundtruth text embedding Et
gdfrom the test set and the audio embedding
Eafrom music generated by models, i.e., Et
gd Ea. The embeddings from both text and audio are
normalized in CLAP model, thus the dot product computes the cosine similarity between text and
audio embeddings.
Second, we would also like to measure the extent to which models are directly copying samples from
the training set. We verify this by first computing the dot products between the audio embedding of
each generated music output to all audio embeddings from the Audiostock training set and returning
the maximum   i.e., the similarity of the nearest-neighbor in the training set. Then, we compute the
fraction of generated outputs whose nearest-neighbors are above a threshold similarity. We refer this
as the nearest-neighbor audio similarity ratio, providing SIM AA@90 0.9, and
SIM AA@95 0.95. The lower this fraction, the lower the risk of plagiarism   i.e., fewer samples
have very close training neighbors. In the Appendix D, we show pairs of examples with both high
and low similarity scores to give further intuition for this metric.
8 2, we present the average text-audio similarity and
nearest-neighbor audio similarity ratios for two thresholds on the 1000 tracks in the Audiostock test
set and the generated music from MuBERT and different variants of MusicLDM. We also provide
two reference points for text-audio similarity   Test Set  and  Retrieval Max . Specifically,  Test Set 
refers to computing the cosine similarity between the groudtruth text embedding and the groudtruth
audio embedding. And  Retrieval Max  refers to first computing the cosine similarities between
each text embedding from the test set to all audio embeddings from the training set, then picking the
highest score as the score of this text, and taking the average over all text scores.
We can observe that the original MusicLDM without mixup achieves the highest text-audio relevance
with an average score of 0.281, but also the highest (worst) nearest-neighbor audio similarity ratio.
MusicLDM with the simple mixup strategy achieves the lowest SIM AA@90 ratio while sacrificing a
lot in the relevance of the generation. The MusicLDM with BAM and BLM achieve a balance between
the audio similarity ratios and the text-to-audio similarity. In combination with the quality evaluation
results in Table 1, we can conclude that all mixup strategies are effective as a data augmentation
techniques to improve generalization of the model to generate more novel music. However simple
mixup degrades the generation quality, which affects the relevance score between audio and text, and
also thus makes it less similar to the tracks in the training set. BAM and BLM apply the tempo and
downbeat filtering on the music pairs to mix, allowing the model to maintain superior generation
quality (Table 1) and text-audio relevance (Table 2), while still utilizing the benefit brought by the
mixup technique to make the generation more novel (less plagiarism). Among the objective metrics,
BLM is the best mixup strategy in terms of quality, relevance and novelty of the generated audio.
This indicates mixing in the latent space is more efficient than mixing directly in audio space, perhaps
because the latent embedding approach implicitly projects the mixture to the learned manifold of
well-formed music. We show the detailed distribution of these metrics over 1000 3, where, for example, audio-audio similarity denotes the individual scores used to calculate
the average SIM AA. We find that the original MusicLDM without mixup has more samples with
high training similarity than other models, which further reflects that it is more prone to copying.
4.3 2, we conduct the subjective listening test on four models, namely
MuBERT, the original MusicLDM, and that with BAM or BLM strategy, to further evaluate the actual
hearing experience of the generated music. We do not include the simple mixup MusicLDM because
its generation is at a low quality while we avoid confusing subjects with too many models in the same
time. We invite 15 6 groups of the generations randomly selected from the test
set. Each of group contains four generations from four models and the corresponding text description.
The subjects are required to rate the music in terms of quality, relevance, and musicality (detailed in
Appendix E). We observe that the samples of MusicLDM with BAM or BLM mixup strategy achieve
a better relevance and quality than those of MuBERT and the original MusicLDM, this strengths
our above analysis. The MuBERT samples achieve the best Musicality, because its generation is
combined from the real music samples. Combined with the objective metrics, beat-synchronous
latent mixup stands to be the most effectiveness method for enhancing the text-to-music generation
in terms of quality, text-music relevance and novelty (i.e., reducing the risk of plagiarism).
5 Limitations
In this section we outline the recognized limitations of our study, serving as a roadmap for future
improvements. Firstly, MusicLDM is trained on the music data in a sampling rate of 16 kHz , while
most standard music productions are 44.1 kHz . This constraint, tied to the Hifi-GAN vocoder s subpar
performance at high sampling rates, impedes practical text-to-music application and necessitates
further improvements. Secondly, resource constraints such as limited real text-music data and GPU
processing power prevent us from scaling up MusicLDM s training. We are unable to determine
if mix-up strategies could yield similar trends as observed with the Audiostock dataset. This issue
exists in the image generation task as well. Lastly, while we recognize beat information as crucial for
music alignment, there is scope for exploring other synchronization techniques like key signature and
instrument alignment. We also intend to investigate the application of different audio space filters to
select suitable music pairs for mixing.
96 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce MusicLDM, a text-to-music generation model that incorporates CLAP,
V AE, Hifi-GAN, and latent diffusion models. We enhance MusicLDM by proposing two efficient
mixup strategies  beat-synchronous audio mixup (BAM) and beat-synchronous latent mixup (BLM),
integrated into its training process. We conduct comprehensive evaluations on different variants
of MusicLDM using objective and subjective metrics, assessing quality, text-music relevance, and
novelty. The experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of BLM as a standout mixup strategy
for text-to-music generation.
7 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Institute for Research and Coordination in Acoustics and Music (IRCAM)
and Project REACH  Raising Co-creativity in Cyber-Human Musicianship for supporting this project.
This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC REACH) under the
European Union s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement #883313).
We would like to thank the support of computation infrastructure from LAION.
References
[1]Andrea Agostinelli, Timo I Denk, Zalán Borsos, Jesse Engel, Mauro Verzetti, Antoine Caillon,
Qingqing Huang, Aren Jansen, Adam Roberts, Marco Tagliasacchi, et al. MusicLM  Generating
music from text. arXiv preprint 2301.11325 , 2023.
[2]Jean-Pierre Briot, Gaëtan Hadjeres, and François-David Pachet. Deep learning techniques for
music generation , volume 1. Springer, 2020.
[3]Nicholas Carlini, Jamie Hayes, Milad Nasr, Matthew Jagielski, Vikash Sehwag, Florian Tramer,
Borja Balle, Daphne Ippolito, and Eric Wallace. Extracting training data from diffusion models.
arXiv preprint 2301.13188 , 2023.
[4]Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. Vggsound  A large-scale
audio-visual dataset. In Proc. ICASSP , 2020.
[5]Ke Chen, Xingjian Du, Bilei Zhu, Zejun Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo Dubnov.
Hts-at  A hierarchical token-semantic audio transformer for sound classification and detection.
InProc. ICASSP , pages 646 650. IEEE, 2022.
[6]Benjamin Elizalde, Soham Deshmukh, Mahmoud Al Ismail, and Huaming Wang. Clap learning
audio concepts from natural language supervision. In Proc. ICASSP , pages 1 5. IEEE, 2023.
[7]Rebecca Fiebrink and Baptiste Caramiaux. The machine learning algorithm as creative musical
tool. arXiv preprint 1611.00379 , 2016.
[8]Seth Forsgren and Hayk Martiros. Riffusion - Stable diffusion for real-time music generation.
2022.
[9]Priya Goyal, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Pieter Noordhuis, Lukasz Wesolowski, Aapo Kyrola,
Andrew Tulloch, Yangqing Jia, and Kaiming He. Accurate, large minibatch sgd  Training
imagenet in 1 hour. arXiv preprint arXiv 1706.02677 , 2017.
[10] Andrey Guzhov, Federico Raue, Jörn Hees, and Andreas Dengel. Audioclip  Extending clip to
image, text and audio. In Proc. ICASSP , pages 976 980. IEEE, 2022.
[11] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
recognition. In Proc. CVPR , pages 770 778, 2016.
[12] Shawn Hershey, Sourish Chaudhuri, Daniel PW Ellis, Jort F Gemmeke, Aren Jansen, R Channing
 Moore, Manoj Plakal, Devin Platt, Rif A Saurous, Bryan Seybold, et al. Cnn architectures
for large-scale audio classification. In Proc. ICASSP , pages 131 135. IEEE, 2017.
10[13] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proc. NeurIPS ,
2020.
[14] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint
arXiv 2207.12598 , 2022.
[15] Qingqing Huang, Daniel S Park, Tao Wang, Timo I Denk, Andy Ly, Nanxin Chen, Zhengdong
Zhang, Zhishuai Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Christian Frank, et al. Noise music  Text-conditioned music
generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint 2302.03917 , 2023.
[16] Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Dongchao Yang, Yi Ren, Luping Liu, Mingze Li, Zhenhui
Ye, Jinglin Liu, Xiang Yin, and Zhou Zhao. Make-an-audio  Text-to-audio generation with
prompt-enhanced diffusion models. arXiv preprint 2301.12661 , 2023.
[17] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam  A method for stochastic optimization. In Proc.
ICLR , 2014.
[18] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. Proc. ICLR , 2013.
[19] Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae. HifiGAN  Generative adversarial networks
for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis. Proc. NeurIPS , 33 17022 17033, 2020.
[20] Qiuqiang Kong, Yin Cao, and Turab Iqbal et al. Panns  Large-scale pretrained audio neural
networks for audio pattern recognition. IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech, Lang. Process. , 2020.
[21] Z. Kong, W. Ping, J. Huang, K. Zhao, and B. Catanzaro. Diffwave  A versatile diffusion model
for audio synthesis. In Proc. ICLR , 2021.
[22] Felix Kreuk, Gabriel Synnaeve, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Alexandre Défossez, Jade Copet,
Devi Parikh, Yaniv Taigman, and Yossi Adi. AudioGen  Textually guided audio generation.
Proc. ICLR , 2022.
[23] Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning
applied to document recognition. Proc. IEEE , 1998.
[24] Haohe Liu, Zehua Chen, Yi Yuan, Xinhao Mei, Xubo Liu, Danilo Mandic, Wenwu Wang, and
Mark D Plumbley. AudioLDM  Text-to-audio generation with latent diffusion models. Proc.
ICML , 2023.
[25] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike
Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta  A robustly optimized bert pretraining
approach. arXiv preprint 1907.11692 , 2019.
[26] MubertAI. Mubert  A simple notebook demonstrating prompt-based music generation.
[27] Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film 
Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proc. AAAI , volume 32, 2018.
[28] Karol J. Piczak. ESC  dataset for environmental sound classification. In Proc. ACM Multimed. ,
2015.
[29] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical
text-conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint 2204.06125 , 2022.
[30] Yi Ren, Chenxu Hu, Xu Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu. FastSpeech 2 
Fast and high-quality end-to-end text to speech. arXiv preprint 2006.04558 , 2020.
[31] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. Highresolution
 image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proc. CVPR , pages 10684 10695,
2022.
[32] Justin Salamon, Christopher Jacoby, and Juan Pablo Bello. A dataset and taxonomy for urban
sound research. In Proc. ACM Multimed. , 2014.
11[33] Gowthami Somepalli, Vasu Singla, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping, and Tom Goldstein.
Diffusion art or digital forgery  investigating data replication in diffusion models. arXiv
preprint 2212.03860 , 2022.
[34] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. Proc.
ICLR , 2020.
[35] Xu Tan, Jiawei Chen, Haohe Liu, Jian Cong, Chen Zhang, Yanqing Liu, Xi Wang, Yichong
Leng, Yuanhao Yi, Lei He, et al. NaturalSpeech  End-to-end text to speech synthesis with
human-level quality. arXiv preprint 2205.04421 , 2022.
[36] George Tzanetakis and Perry Cook. Musical genre classification of audio signals. IEEE
Transactions on speech and audio processing , 10(5) 293 302, 2002.
[37] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, and Niki Parmar et al. Attention is all you need. In Proc.
NeurIPS , 2017.
[38] Ho-Hsiang Wu, Prem Seetharaman, Kundan Kumar, and Juan Pablo Bello. Wav clip  Learning
robust audio representations from clip. In Proc. ICASSP , pages 4563 4567. IEEE, 2022.
[39] Yusong Wu, Ke Chen, Tianyu Zhang, Yuchen Hui, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Shlomo
Dubnov. Large-scale contrastive language-audio pretraining with feature fusion and keywordto-caption
 augmentation. In Proc. ICASSP , pages 1 5. IEEE, 2023.
[40] Dongchao Yang, Jianwei Yu, Helin Wang, Wen Wang, Chao Weng, Yuexian Zou, and Dong Yu.
DiffSound  Discrete diffusion model for text-to-sound generation. IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech,
Lang. Process. , 2023.
[41] Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. Mixup  Beyond
empirical risk minimization. Proc. ICLR , 2017.
[42] Jingwei Zhao, Gus Xia, and Ye Wang. Beat transformer  Demixed beat and downbeat tracking
with dilated self-attention. Proc. ISMIR , 2022.
12 3  Comparison of zero-shot classification performance of the CLAP used in this work with
previous audio-language contrastive learning models.
ESC-50 US K VGGSound GTZAN
Wav CLIP [38] 41.4 40.4 10.0 audioCLIP
 [10] 68.6 68.8 - CLAP
 (Elizalde et al. [6]) 82.6 73.2 - 25.2
CLAP (Wu et al. [39]) 91.0 77.0 46.2 71.0
CLAP (ours on music data) 90.1 80.6 46.6 71.0
A MusicLDM Details
Hyperparameters For audio signal processing, we use the sampling rate of 16 kHz to convert all
music samples for the training of MusicLDM. Each input data is a chunk of 10.24 seconds randomly
selected from the dataset, i.e., L  163840 . We use the hop size 160, the window size 1024 , the filter
length 1024 , and the number of mel-bins 128to compute the short-time Fourier transform (STFT)
and mel-spectrograms. As the result, the input mel-spectrogram has the time frame T  1024 and
the mel-bins F  128 .
We adopt a convolutional V AE as the latent audio representation model, consisting of a 4-block
downsampling encoder and a 4-block upsampling decoder. The downsampling and upsampling
rateP  8 16 , i.e., the bottleneck latent variable yhas a shape of
(C T
P F
P)   (16 128 16). For the latent diffusion model, we refer the UNet latent diffusion
model2. It contains 4 encoder blocks, 1 bottleneck block, and 4 decoder blocks. Each block contains
2 residual CNN layers [ 23] and 1 spatial transformer layer [ 37]. The channel dimensions of encoder
blocks are 128,256,384, and 640and reversed in decoder blocks. For Hifi-GAN, we adopt its
official repository along with the configuration4. We change the number of mel-bins to 128to fit the
processing of MusicLDM.
Implementation and Training Details For the training of V AE, we use the Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 4.5 10 6 24. We apply the mel-spectrogram loss, adversarial
loss, and a Gaussian constraint loss as the training object of V AE. For the training of Hifi-GAN, we
use the batch size of 96 and the AdamW optimizer with β1 0.8,β2 0.99 2 10 4. For the training of MusicLDM, we use the batch size of 24 3 10 5. In the forward process, we use 1000-step of a linear noise schedule
fromβ1 0.0015 toβ1000 0.0195 . In the sampling process, we use the DDIM [ 34] sampler with
200 steps. We adopt the classifier-free guidance [ 14] with a guidance scale w  2.0. When applying
the mixup strategy, we use the mixup rate p  0.5. The CLAP model is trained on 24 100 GPUs.
The V AE and HifiGAN model are trained on 4 60 GPUs. Last, the latent diffusion model is trained
on single NVIDIA A40. All models are converged at the end of the training.
Implementation of Comparison Model For generating from Riffusion and MuBERT, we use the
official API of Riffusion and MuBERT6.
B CLAP Details
B.1 Hyperparameters
For model hyperparameters, we refer to the official repository to conduct the training process of
CLAP. The audio encoder of CLAP is HTS-AT-base [ 5] and the text encoder is RoBERTa-base
[25]. The HTS-AT-base model has an embedding dimension of 128, and a window size of 8. The
2https //huggingface.co/spaces/multimodalart/latentdiffusion
3https //github.com/jik876/hifi-gan
4https //github.com/jik876/hifi-gan/blob/master/config_v1.json
5https //huggingface.co/riffusion/riffusion-model-v1 6https //github.com/MubertAI/Mubert-Text-to-Music
7https //github.com/LAION-AI/CLAPMusic Tracks in the Training Set
Generated Samples from Models
Similarity 0.924 0.935 0.961 4  The spectrograms of music pairs indicated by high cosine similiarity score of CLAP audio
embeddings.
HTS-AT-base model has 4 groups of swin-transformer blocks, each group has depth of [2,2,12,2]
and number of head in [4,8,16,32]. The RoBERTa-base consists of a transformer model with 12
layers, 8 heads, and a inner width of 512. The audio embedding and the text embedding have the
dimension size D  512 .
B.2 Training Details
For the training of CLAP, we use the batch size of 2304 and the Adam [ 17] optimizer with β1 0.99,
β2 0.9with a warm-up [9] and cosine learning rate decay at a basic learning rate of 1 10 4.
B.3 Zero-shot Classification Performance
We follow previous works on audio-language contrastive learning [ 9] to evaluate the performance of
CLAP on the zero-shot audio classification tasks, namely on the benchmark datasets of ESC-50 [ 28],
UrbanSound 8K [ 32], and VGGSound [ 4]. To demonstrate that the retrained CLAP involves more
understandings of music data, we further add a music genre classification benchmark dataset GTZAN
[36] into the evalution. As shown in Table 3, our retained CLAP achieves best performance acoustic
event classification in UrbanSound 8K and VGGSound dataset, while still maintaining comparable
performance in ESC-50 dataset and on par performance in GTZAN music classification dataset.
Although the performance on GTZAN music dataset is not improved, the extra data used for training
CLAP might result in a better representation space which is beneficial for text-to-music generation
model.
C Nearest-Neighbor Audio Similarity Samples
As mentioned in section 4.2.2, we introduced the computation of the nearest-neighbor audio similarity
ratio by comparing the cosine similarity between generated music and music tracks in the training set
of Audiostock.
In this section, we provide visualizations of the similarity between the generated music and the
training music using spectrograms, showcasing how well the cosine similarity between CLAP audio
embeddings captures this similarity.
As shown in Figure 4 5, display both three examples of music pairs with high and
low similarity. To achieve this, we divided the training music tracks into 10-second segments and
determined the most similar segment to the generated music track (i.e., the query track).
14 0.803 0.813 0.820 5  The spectrograms of music pairs indicated by low cosine similarity score of CLAP audio
embeddings.
For instances with high similarity, the cosine similarity of CLAP audio embeddings reveals highly
similar structural patterns, indicating a close resemblance in the music arrangements. Conversely, low
CLAP cosine similarity indicates significant differences between the spectrograms of the generated
music and the training music. This demonstrates the effectiveness of CLAP embeddings in assessing
the similarity between music tracks and serving as a means to detect novelty and potential instances
of plagiarism in the generated samples.
D Subjective Listening Test
The subjective listening test was conducted in an online survey format to gather feedback and insights
on the text-to-music generation using MusicLDMs and MuBERT. The generation of Riffusion was not
included due to its lower quality and relevance compared to the standard. The test had an estimated
duration of approximately 10 minutes.
At the beginning of the test, participants were asked to provide their age range and music background
as metadata. Subsequently, participants were randomly assigned six groups of generated songs. Each
group consisted of four songs generated from MusicLDM, MusicLDM with BAM, MusicLDM with
BLM, and MuBERT, all based on the same textual description. The order of the songs within each
group was shuffled to eliminate positional bias during rating. Participants were required to rate each
song based on three metrics 
 Relevance  Determine how well the song matches the given music description. Rate the
song based on how closely it aligns with the provided description.
 Quality  Assess the overall quality of the music. Consider factors such as clarity, absence of
noise, and general audio quality. Rate the song based on these criteria.
 Musicality  Evaluate the musical attributes of the song, including rhythm, melodies, and
textures. Rate the song based on its overall musical appeal.
Each song in the subjective listening test had a duration of approximately 10 seconds and included
a fade-in and fade-out to mitigate bias from the song s beginning and ending sections. The rating
scale used for evaluating the songs was designed such that a higher score indicates better quality.
Participants were asked to rate each song based on the provided metrics, taking into account the
song s overall quality, relevance to the given text, and personal preference on its musicality.
15E Broader Impact
The development and implementation of MusicLDM, or generally a text-to-music generation model
offers potential benefits and also raises concerns that must be addressed responsibly.
Positive Impacts
 Promoting Creativity  This model can serve as a tool to augment human creativity. Artists,
composers, and music amateurs can use it to transfer their textual ideas into music, broadening
 the realm of artistic exploration and making music creation more accessible and
convenient.
 Cultural Preservation and Evolution  The model provides a unique platform to archive,
digitize, and even evolve cultural musical expressions. Textual descriptions of traditional
and folk music can be transformed into the actual music, thereby helping to preserve heritage
while simultaneously allowing for creative adaptations. Literature, such as poetry, can be
interpreted as music to explore more relations between different types of cultural expression
forms.
 Education and Research  In academia, this model can be used as a pedagogical tool in
music education. It can aid in understanding the complex relationship between music and
linguistic structures, enriching interdisciplinary research in musicology, linguistics, and
artificial intelligence.
 Entertainment Industry Innovation  The entertainment industry could use this model to
generate soundtracks for movies, games, and other media based on scripts. This could
potentially revolutionize the way music is produced for media, reducing time and costs.
Negative Impacts
 Artistic Job Displacement  While this model can augment human creativity, it may also
lead to job losses in the music industry if widely adopted for composing and production.
The model could potentially replace human composers in certain contexts, particularly in
industries such as film and gaming that require a significant amount of background music.
 Copyright Issues  In this paper, one of the targets is to mitigate the copyright issues and
plagiarism. The generated music could unintentionally resemble existing works, raising
complex copyright infringement issues. It is crucial to implement measures to ensure that
the model does not violate intellectual property rights.
 Ethical Misuse  The model could be misused to create music promoting hate speech,
misinformation, or other harmful content if the input text has such characteristics. Thus, it
is essential to develop safeguards to mitigate the risk of misuse.
 Cultural Appropriation and Homogenization  While the model can help preserve music,
there is a risk of homogenizing unique cultural musical styles or misappropriating them
without proper credit or context.
The design and application of this model should be carried out responsibly, considering the potential
ethical, social, and economic consequences. Balancing its many benefits with its potential downsides
will require the collective effort of developers, users, policy makers, and society at large.
16