Schedule -
Commencement - Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University
———
Search
Search
Search this site only
Commencement
Commencement
›
Schedule
Commencement Schedule
We are proud to celebrate our newest graduates during this year’s commencement exercises!
Main Commencement Ceremony
Diploma Ceremonies
Main Commencement Ceremony
Bachelor’s, master’s and doctoral degree candidates and their guests are invited to join the main commencement ceremony on Sunday, May 12, for the conferral of all degrees.
The main ceremony will include remarks from the president, keynote speaker, student speaker and academic deans, in addition to recognition of the honorary degree recipients.
There is no limit on number of guests who can attend the main commencement ceremony and tickets are not needed.
The ceremony will take place on CMU’s campus beginning at 10 a.m. and will be approximately 1.5 hours long. All guests must be seated by 9:15 a.m. for the start of teh student procession. Access to guest seating will be restricted once the student procession begins.
Diploma Ceremonies
In addition to the main commencement ceremony, each college/school/department will host a diploma ceremony to recognize all graduating students. Diploma ceremonies will be held over the course of the weekend (Friday, May 10–Sunday, May 12).
Diploma ceremonies will include the presentation of diplomas to graduates, hooding of doctoral candidates and remarks from their college/school/department leadership. Each ceremony is organized and customized by their college/school/department.
Diploma ceremonies will take place both on and off campus. Locations and times for diploma ceremonies will be provided soon.
Diploma ceremonies typically include a reception and the length of time for each ceremony varies based on the number of graduates.
More details on the weekend schedule, including a diploma ceremony schedule, will be provided in the coming weeks.
Thursday, May 9
Phi Beta Kappa Initiation CeremonyCeremony: 2–3 p.m.McConomy Auditorium, Cohon University CenterReception: 3–4 p.m.Connan Room, Cohon University Center
Contact:Joseph Devinejd0x@andrew.cmu.edu
Joanne Ursenbachjoanneu@andrew.cmu.edu
President's Graduates Toast (bachelor's students)3:30–4:30 p.m.Location TBDRegistration required. Invitation, along with registration details, will be sent in late April.
First Gen Graduation RecognitionReception: 5-5:30 p.m.Alumni Concert Hall, College of Fine ArtsCeremony: 5:30-6:30p.m.Kresge Theater, College of Fine Arts
Contact:M. Shernell Smithmssmith@andrew.cmu.edu
Sam Colavecchioscolavec@andrew.cmu.edu 412-268-7733
Friday, May 10
Diploma CeremoniesVarious times
Senior Leadership Recognition Ceremony4–5:30 p.m.Wiegand Gym, Cohon University CenterUndergraduate students and their guests by invitation only. This ceremony recognizes nominated seniors who have reflected upon their specific leadership contributions during their time at CMU.
Saturday, May 11
Diploma CeremoniesVarious times
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion CeremonyNoon–2:30 p.m.Simmons Auditorium, Tepper Building
Contact:M. Shernell Smithmssmith@andrew.cmu.edu
Sam Colavecchioscolavec@andrew.cmu.edu
Naval ROTC CommissioningCeremony: 1:30-2:30 p.m.Auditorium, Soldiers & Sailors Memorial Hall & Museum *4141 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Contact:Mike Dankomdanko@andrew.cmu.edu
The President’s Reception in honor of CMU’s Doctoral Candidates4–6 p.m.Tepper Building Atrium
Sunday, May 12
Gesling Stadium opens to guests8 a.m.
Robing and procession for graduates9–10 a.m.Various locations across campus
Student procession begins9:15 a.m.All guests in stadium must be seated. Access to guest seating will be restricted once the procession begins.
Commencement Ceremony10–11:30 a.m.Gesling Stadium, CMU’s campus
Diploma CeremoniesVarious times
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
412-268-5052
Contact Us
Legal Info
www.cmu.edu
© 2024 Carnegie Mellon University
CMU on Facebook
CMU on Twitter
CMU on Instagram
Schedule
Main Ceremony
Diploma Ceremonies
Graduates
Doctoral Candidates
Families & Guests
FAQ
Contact Us