1. What is the name of the university's athletic program?
2. What is the name of the university's basketball team?
3. What is the name of the university's cross country team?
4. What is the name of the university's football team?
5. What is the name of the university's golf team?
6. What is the name of the university's soccer team?
7. What is the name of the university's swimming and diving team?
8. What is the name of the university's track and field team?
9. What is the name of the university's tennis team?
10. What is the name of the university's women's basketball team?
1. What is the name of the athletic department at Carnegie Mellon University?
2. How many sports teams does Carnegie Mellon University offer?
3. What is the name of the athletic department's annual report?
4. What is the purpose of the Black and Latinx Athlete Coalition?
5. What is the name of the mentoring program offered by the athletic department?
6. How can students add their information to the athletic department's recruiting database?
7. What is the name of the student-athlete advisory council?
8. What is the purpose of the Queer Athlete and Ally Collective?
9. What is the name of the student experience program?
10. What is the purpose of the SMART program?
1. What is the Kiltie Band's primary function?
2. When did the Kiltie Band first perform?
3. How many members does the Kiltie Band consist of?
4. What type of music does the Kiltie Band play during football season?
5. How often does the Kiltie Concert Band perform?
6. Is membership open to all members of the campus/community?
7. What is expected of participants in terms of attendance, attitude, and dependability?
8. Where are rehearsals held during football season?
9. Where are performances held?
10. Can you name any of the facilities where the Kiltie Band performs?
1. When is the Kiltie Band's performances?
2. Are there any auditions for the Kiltie Band?
3. Do you have to memorize music for the Kiltie Band?
4. When is the first rehearsal for the Kiltie Band?
5. Can you borrow an instrument from the school for the Kiltie Band?
6. What do the members of the Kiltie Band wear under their kilts?
1. What is the focus of the Ph.D. program in Language and Information Technologies at LTI?
2. How many units of graduate-level courses are required to complete a Ph.D. in Language and Information Technologies?
3. What are the proficiencies that Ph.D. students must satisfy?
4. What is the research speaking requirement for Ph.D. students?
5. Can you provide a sample of what a five-year schedule might look like for a Ph.D. student in LTI?
6. What are the two lab courses that Ph.D. students must take in two different research areas?
7. What is the difference between LTI courses and SCS courses?
8. What is the focus area of Grammars and Lexicons course?
9. What is the focus area of Machine Translation course?
10. What is the focus area of Search Engines course?
1. What is the centralized online application process for Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
2. What is the deadline for fall admission to any of the LTI's graduate programs?
3. Is the GRE required for Ph.D. applications? If so, what is the institution code? Department code?
4. What is the English proficiency requirement for students who will be studying on an F-1 or J-1 visa?
5. What is the minimum TOEFL score required for successful applicants?
1. What is our Institution Code?
2. What is the Department Code?
3. What documents must be submitted along with the application? (Choose all that apply)
4. What is the purpose of the short video required as part of the application process?
5. Are incomplete applications eligible for consideration? (Yes or No)
6. Who can provide additional information about the Ph.D. program? (Choose all that apply)
7. What is included in the PhD Handbook? (Choose all that apply)
8. Can outside funding be accompanied by an official award letter? (Yes or No)
1. What are the three universities that participate in the LTI dual-degree Ph.D program with Carnegie Mellon?
2. How many years will a student spend in Portugal for the LTI dual-degree Ph.D program?
3. What is the focus of the coursework for students in the LTI dual-degree Ph.D program?
4. How many courses can a student complete during their first year in Portugal?
5. What is the minimum number of courses a student must complete during their last two years in Portugal?
6. Can you name one of the universities that co-supervises students' progress in the LTI dual-degree Ph.D program?
7. What is the main focus of the research conducted by students during their last two years in Portugal?
8. How long does it take for a student to complete their dissertation after returning from Pittsburgh?
1. What is the centralized online application process for LTI's graduate programs?
2. What is the application deadline for Fall 2024?
3. What is the cost of the application fee for LTI's graduate programs?
4. Are GRE scores required for all Ph.D. applications?
5. What is the institution code for GRE scores?
6. What is the department code for GRE scores?
7. Is English proficiency required for students studying on an F-1 or J-1 visa?
8. What is the English proficiency requirement for these students?
9. Can fee waivers be available for select programs?
10. Where can students find more information about fee waivers?
1. What is the minimum TOEFL score required for successful applicants?
2. What is the Institution Code for the university's FAQ page?
3. What documents must be submitted as part of the application process?
4. Is the video submission a required part of the application process? Why or why not?
5. What happens if an application is incomplete?
6. Can outside funding be accompanied by an official award letter?
7. How can you contact Stacey Young for specific application/admissions questions?
8. What is the website for CMU | Portugal?
1. What is the main focus of the MLT program?
2. How long does the MLT program last?
3. What are the minimum number of course units that MLT students must complete?
4. Can MLT students take courses from other departments at CMU or Pitt? If so, how many units may they take?
5. What is directed research, and how is it an integral part of the MLT program?
6. Is an optional MLT thesis available for students? If so, where can they find guidelines for completing one?
7. How does the curriculum for the MLT program typically break down over two years?
8. Can you provide an example of how a student's two years in the MLT program might look?
1. What is the application deadline for fall admission to the LTIs graduate programs?
2. Is GRE scores required for application to graduate programs at Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
3. Can you mail anything to the admissions office at Carnegie Mellon?
4. What is the cost of the application fee for graduate programs at Carnegie Mellon?
5. Are fee waivers available for graduate program applications at Carnegie Mellon? If so, what are the requirements?
1. What is the minimum TOEFL score required for successful applicants?
2. What is the Institution Code for submitting TOEFL scores?
3. What information is required for application submission? (Select all that apply)
4. Is it mandatory to submit a video as part of the application process?
5. Can incomplete applications be considered for admission?
6. What is the current tuition rate for graduate students? (According to the text)
7. Are Research Assistantships guaranteed for MLT students? (Select one)
8. Where can students find additional information regarding financial aid and billing/payments?
9. What resources does Enrollment & Finances provide for financial aid and tuition payments?
10. What information can be found in the MLT Handbook? (Select all that apply)
1. What is the main focus of the Master's in Intelligent Information Systems program?
2. How many units of practical experience does the program require?
3. What are the three types of practical experience offered in the program?
4. Can the summer internship be waived for students with sufficient prior professional experience?
5. What is the duration of the capstone project?
6. What is the purpose of directed study projects with faculty advisors?
7. What kind of skills will students gain from the program?
8. What are some examples of companies that MIIS alumni have gone on to work at?
9. How long does it typically take for MIIS graduates to secure job offers after graduation?
10. What is unique about the combination of classroom instruction, professional experience, and group-oriented capstone project?
1. What are the two options for completing the MIIS degree program?
2. What is the duration of the MIIS-16 track?
3. What is the duration of the MIIS: Advanced Study track?
4. What concentration areas are available for MIIS: Advanced Study track students?
5. How many units of qualifying and elective courses do MIIS-16 students need to complete?
6. How many units of qualifying and elective courses do MIIS-21 students need to complete?
7. What is the total number of units required for completing the MIIS-21 program?
8. What is the typical course load for MIIS-16 students in their first fall semester?
9. What is the typical course load for MIIS-21 students in their second fall semester?
10. What is the purpose of MIIS Capstone Planning Seminar?
1. What is an internship?
2. What is conversational interfaces?
3. What is MIIS Capstone Project?
4. What are the courses offered in Fall 1?
5. What is Directed Study?
6. What is MIIS Capstone Planning Seminar?
7. What is Applied ML?
8. What is Machine Translation?
9. What is Comp Semantics for NLP?
10. What is Neural Networks for NLP?
1. What is the application deadline for Fall 2024 admission to Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
2. What is the cost of the application fee for Fall 2024 admission to Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
3. Does Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science require GRE scores for Master's applications?
4. What is the institution code for Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science on the GRE test?
5. What is the department code for Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science on the GRE test?
6. Is there a early deadline for application submission for Fall 2024 admission to Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
7. Can fee waivers be available for Master's applications to Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
8. What information can be found on the School of Computer Science Fee Waiver page?
1. What is required for F-1 or J-1 visa holders who are not native English speakers?
2. What standardized tests can be used to demonstrate English proficiency for these visa holders?
3. Why is the "TOEFL ITP Plus for China" not accepted?
4. Can waivers be issued for non-native English speakers?
5. What is the time frame for submitting valid English proficiency scores?
1. What is the maximum age of an expired test score that can be submitted for admission into the Master's program at SCS?
2. What is the minimum number of letters of recommendation required for admission into the MIIS program?
3. What is the duration of the internship experience required for the MCDS program?
4. What are the three majors offered under the MCDS program?
5. Can the MCDS degree be earned in two different ways? If so, how?
6. What is the minimum number of units required to graduate with an MCDS degree?
7. What is the typical duration of the MCDS program for most students?
8. What is the purpose of the short video submission required as part of the MIIS application?
9. How many semesters are required to complete the MCDS program?
10. What is the name of the handbook that provides detailed information about the MIIS program and its policies?
1. How many months does the MCDS program last?
2. How many units of study are required for MCDS program?
3. What is the minimum number of core courses that MCDS students must choose?
4. Can MCDS students take electives from SCS course catalog? If so, what are the requirements?
5. What is the purpose of taking Introduction to Computer Systems course?
6. What happens if MCDS students fail to pass Introduction to Computer Systems course?
7. Can MCDS students take additional courses beyond the required 144 units? If so, what are the requirements?
8. What are some examples of courses that MCDS students can take? Please provide at least two examples.
9. What is the purpose of Data Science Seminar course in MCDS program?
10. Can MCDS students take Capstone Planning Seminar course in their spring semester of their second year? Why or why not?
1. What is the name of the program that Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science has a centralized online application process for?
2. What is the deadline for submitting applications for fall admission to any of the Learning Technologies graduate programs?
3. Is there a fee waiver available for participants in select "pipeline" programs? If so, where can more information be found?
4. What is the name of the GRE test that is required for Ph.D. applications?
5. What is the institution code for Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
6. What is the department code for Carnegie Mellon's School of Computer Science?
1. What is required for applicants who will be studying on an F-1 or J-1 visa?
2. What is the preferred standardized test for demonstrating English proficiency?
3. What is not scored in the "TOEFL ITP Plus for China"?
4. Are waivers available for non-native speakers of English? Why?
5. What is the time frame for submitting English proficiency exam scores?
6. Can scores from previous studies in English be accepted? Why or why not?
7. What is the website to visit for more information about MCDS admission English proficiency score policies?
8. What is the name of the standardized test required for demonstrating English proficiency?
9. What is the name of the exam that is preferred for demonstrating English proficiency?
10. Can scores from previous studies in English be accepted regardless of where it occurred? Why or why not?
1. What is the minimum TOEFL score required for admission to the MCDS program?
2. What is the IELTS score required for admission to the MCDS program?
3. What is the DuoLingo score required for admission to the MCDS program?
4. What is the Institution Code for the MCDS program?
5. What is the Department Code for the MCDS
1. What is the focus of the MSAII program?
2. What is the difference between intrapreneurship and entrepreneurship?
3. What undergraduate degrees are generally held by incoming students in the MSAII program?
4. What is included in the Capstone project?
5. How many units of study are required to complete the MSAII degree?
6. What is the format of the Elective courses?
7. What is the topic of the AI Innovation course?
8. What is Natural Language Processing?
9. What is Applied Machine Learning?
10. What is Web Application Development?
1. What is the name of the course that covers AI Innovation, Natural Language Processing, Applied Machine Learning, and Web Application Development?
2. According to the text, what is the application deadline for Fall 2024?
3. What is the cost of the application fee for one program?
4. Is there any possibility of getting a fee waiver? If yes, what are the criteria for getting a fee waiver?
5. What is the required GPA for admission into the School of Computer Science?
6. What is the institution code for GRE scores?
7. What is the department code for GRE scores?
8. What is the name of the course that covers Deep Learning?
9. What is the requirement for English Language Proficiency for students who will be studying on an F-1 or J-1 visa?
10. According to the text, what is the final application deadline for Fall 2024?
1. According to the text, what is the English proficiency requirement for the MSAII program?
2. Where can you find more information regarding test scores for the MSAII program?
3. What is the purpose of submitting unofficial transcripts from each university you have attended?
4. What should your statement of purpose discuss according to the text?
5. What are the three letters of recommendation required for the MSAII program?
6. Why is it strongly suggested to submit a short video of yourself as part of the application process?
7. What is included in the MSAII Handbook?
8. Where can you find more information about the MSAII program?
9. What is the purpose of the directed project in the LTI program?
10. What are the prerequisite courses for the language technologies minor?
1. What are the prerequisites for the Language Technologies Concentration?
2. What is the core course for the Language Technologies Concentration?
3. What are the three elective courses that students can choose from for the Language Technologies Concentration?
4. What is the undergraduate research project requirement for completing the Language Technologies Concentration?
5. What is the deadline for applying for admission to the Language Technologies Minor?
6. Who is the program director for the Language Technologies Minor?
7. Where can students go for more information on the undergraduate minor in Language Technologies?
1. What is the name of the institution located at 5000 Forbes Avenue in Pittsburgh, PA?
2. What is the phone number of the Language Technologies Institute at Carnegie Mellon University?
3. Where can one find contact information for the Language Technologies Institute at Carnegie Mellon University?
4. What is the email address of the Language Technologies Institute at Carnegie Mellon University?
5. What is the name of the institution located at 5000 Forbes Avenue in Pittsburgh, PA?
1. Who is Andrew Carnegie?
2. What was Carnegie Technical Schools?
3. What did Carnegie donate $1 million for?
4. What was the motto of Carnegie Technical Schools?
5. What were some of the programs offered at Carnegie Technical Schools?
6. What was the first degree awarded at Carnegie Tech?
7. When was Carnegie Tech founded?
8. What was the architectural style of Carnegie Tech campus?
9. What was unique about the machine shops, studios and laboratories at Carnegie Tech?
10. What was the first U.S. degree awarded at Carnegie Tech?
1. What did Carnegie Tech begin offering in 1919?
2. What did Carnegie Tech lay the groundwork for in its early years?
3. What was the 'Carnegie Plan' introduced in 1938?
4. What was the significance of Carnegie's death in 1919?
5. What was the name of the first IBM computer that arrived on campus in 1956?
6. What were the three new schools opened by Carnegie Tech in the post-war years?
7. What was the name of the school that was renamed in 1973?
8. What was the focus of the David A. Tepper School of Business?
9. What was the name of the school that was led by interdisciplinary efforts of Allen Newell and Herbert Simon?
10. What was the name of the science research center that Carnegie Tech merged with in 1967?
1. What was Carnegie Mellon University celebrating in 2017?
2. Where is Carnegie Mellon University located? (Give at least 3 different locations)
3. What is the focus of Carnegie Mellon University's Strategic Plan 2025?
4. How will Carnegie Mellon University expand in the coming years?
5. What is unique about Carnegie Mellon University's research and innovation? (Give at least one example)
6. What is the university's goal for delivering work that matters?
1. What is SCS25?
2. When did the School of Computer Science celebrate its 25th year as a stand-alone college within Carnegie Mellon University?
3. What was the first computer that arrived on the campus of Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1956?
4. Who established Carnegie Tech's first Computation Center?
5. In what year did Alan Perlis begin teaching the first freshman-level computer programming course in the United States?
6. Who is credited with defining the term "computer science"?
7. What was the name of the computer program developed by Simon, Newell, and Shaw?
8. What were the linked-list data structures that Simon, Newell, and Shaw developed?
9. What is the name of the magazine that published an expanded history of the School of Computer Science and its predecessors at CMU?
10. What is the name of the article that published an expanded history of the School of Computer Science and its predecessors at CMU?
1. What was created in 1961?
2. What interdisciplinary Ph.D. program was created at Carnegie Tech in 1961?
3. What was the focus of the Computer Science Department established in 1965?
4. Who was the first department head of the Computer Science Department?
5. What was the name of the nearby Mellon Institute of Industrial Research that merged with Carnegie Institute of Technology in 1967?
6. Which university dean joined the Computer Science Department in 1969?
7. What were some of the research areas that Raj Reddy brought with him when he joined the Computer Science Department in 1969?
8. What was the name of the building where the Computation Center and its newest computer were moved to in 1961?
9. What was the name of the grant that the Computer Science Department received in 1965?
10. What was the name of the federal government agency that funded much of the department's research?
1. What was the crisis that the Computer Science Department of CMU faced in 1970 and 1971?
2. Who was recruited from Bell Labs to become the new department head of CMU's Computer Science Department?
3. What were some of the large projects that emerged in the Computer Science Department during this time?
4. In which year were Simon and Newell awarded the A.M. Turing Award for their work in artificial intelligence?
5. What was the result of Newell's interest in human-computer interaction?
6. What was the name of the first commercially available workstation that featured a graphical-user interface?
7. Who was the director of CMU's Robotics Institute when it was established in 1979?
8. How many faculty members and graduate students were included in the Computer Science Department of CMU by 1982?
9. What was developed with IBM in the early 1980s?
10. What was provided for 7,000 students, faculty members, and employees of CMU?
1. What was the Andrew Project at Carnegie Mellon University?
2. What did Newell refer to as “greening up the campus with computer science”?
3. What was the amount of sponsored research in the Computer Science Department between 1982-1985?
4. What was proposed by CSD head A. Nico Habermann and then-CMU provost Angel Jordan in 1986?
5. What was the outcome of establishing a free-floating Department of Computer Science?
6. What was created as a joint effort between CMU, the University of Pittsburgh and Westinghouse Electric Corp. in 1986?
7. When was the SCS officially formed?
8. What was President Richard Cyert’s plan to elevate the Department of Computer Science to college status?
1. What was the name of the department that was incorporated into SCS?
2. Who was appointed as the Dean of Computer Science at CMU?
3. When did the School of Computer Science make its formal debut?
4. What was the name of the bachelor's degree program offered by the Mathematics Department before SCS was established?
5. Who led CMU's first effort to design an undergraduate curriculum solely in computer science?
6. According to the Carnegie Plan, what were the principles of a sound professional education?
7. How many undergraduates were admitted to the computer science program as sophomores in the 1989-90 academic year?
8. How many undergraduates were admitted to the program in 1990-91?
1. How many undergraduates were enrolled at SCS by 1995?
2. What is the name of the department that became the Language Technologies Institute?
3. When was the Human-Computer Interaction Institute formed?
4. What is the name of the department that was formed in 1999?
5. What is the name of the center that was formed in 2009?
6. How many faculty members were there at SCS in 2013?
7. What was the total student enrollment at SCS in 2013?
8. How much research was conducted at SCS in 2013?
9. How many people are part of the Robotics Institute?
10. Who outlined a vision for computer science?
1. What is Carnegie Mellon University's mascot?
2. Which men's sports team at Carnegie Mellon University has a schedule of games?
3. How many roster spots are available for men's cross country at Carnegie Mellon University?
4. Which women's sports team at Carnegie Mellon University has a schedule of games?
5. How many roster spots are available for women's soccer at Carnegie Mellon University?
6. What is the name of Carnegie Mellon University's athletic conference?
7. Which men's sports team at Carnegie Mellon University has a Twitter account?
8. Which women's sports team at Carnegie Mellon University has a Facebook account?
9. Which men's sports team at Carnegie Mellon University has a schedule of games for the upcoming season?
10. How many roster spots are available for men's golf at Carnegie Mellon University?
1. Who founded Carnegie Mellon University?
2. What is a Tartan?
3. What is the difference between tartan and plaid?
4. What is the name of the Scottish terrier mascot at Carnegie Mellon University?
5. What is the name of the graphic mascot at Carnegie Mellon University?
1. What does the text state about the arrangement of colored threads in the warp and weft?
2. What is the result of crossing vertical and horizontal stripes of the same color?
3. What is the name of Carnegie Mellon University's official mascot?
4. When was Carnegie Mellon University's mascot officially named?
5. What is the name of the live dog that is also known as Scotty to the Carnegie Mellon community?
6. What is the capacity of Gesling Stadium?
7. What is the surface of Gesling Stadium?
8. What is the capacity of Wiegand Gymnasium?
9. What is the surface of Wiegand Gymnasium?
10. What is Carnegie Mellon University's affiliation for athletics?
1. What is the name of the conference that University Athletic Association is a part of?
2. Who is the President of University Athletic Association?
3. What is Dr. Josh Centor's alma mater and year?
4. What is the phone number of University Athletic Association's athletic department?
5. What is the mailing address of University Athletic Association?
1. What is Bhiksha Ramakrishnan's email address?
2. What are the research areas of Carolyn Rosé?
3. What is Alexander Rudnicky's phone number?
4. What is Maarten Sap's research area?
5. Who is Michael Shamos?
6. What is Rita Singh's email address?
1. What is Rita Singh's email address?
2. What is Emma Strubell's research area?
3. What is Alexander Waibel's office address?
4. What are Shinji Watanabe's research areas?
5. Who is Sean Welleck?
6. What is Eric P. Xing's email address?
7. What is Chenyan Xiong's phone number?
8. What is Yiming Yang's email address?
1. What is Yiming Yang's title at Carnegie Mellon University?
2. What is Yiming Yang's email address at Carnegie Mellon University?
3. What is Yiming Yang's office location at Carnegie Mellon University?
4. What is Yiming Yang's phone number at Carnegie Mellon University?
1. What is Buggy Races?
2. How long has Buggy Races been held at Carnegie Mellon University?
3. What are the basic components of a buggy?
4. How many people are needed to maneuver a buggy around Schenley Park's Flagstaff Hill?
5. What is the significance of fairings in buggy racing?
6. Which team is celebrating its 50th anniversary of Buggy racing?
7. What is Diya Nuxoll's degree in?
8. What is the name of the person responsible for media inquiries regarding Buggy Races?
9. What is the phone number of Julie Mattera?
10. What is the name of the tradition that is held during Spring Carnival at Carnegie Mellon University?
1. What does Diya Nuxoll say about Fringe's reputation?
2. What degree is Diya Nuxoll working on?
3. What is Sweepstakes Slang?
4. What is the name of the mural found at CMU's Stever House?
5. What is the meaning of "Buggy"?
6. What is the term for the section of the freeroll portion of the buggy course?
7. Who provides a signal for buggy drivers?
8. What is the role of a driver?
9. What is a pushbar?
10. What is the name of the structure attached to a buggy?
11. What is the transition procedure?
12. What is Fringe planning to roll this year?
13. What is Dave Singh's degree?
14. What does Dave Singh say about Fringe's communication?
15. What is the significance of "fr" in front of words for Fringe members?
1. What letter does Fringe vehicles often start with?
2. What names does SDC (Student Dormitory Committee) team use for their buggies?
3. What is the name of the event where buggies will be showcased?
4. How many practice runs must drivers log to qualify for races?
5. What is Tishya Girdhar's role in Fringe?
6. Why did Tishya Girdhar want to drive?
7. What is the philosophy of Fringe team?
8. Can you describe how a driver is positioned inside Boson?
1. What is the top priority for teams during buggy races?
2. What safety gear is required for drivers during buggy races?
3. What can make driving challenging due to potholes?
4. How many lanes may run during buggy races depending on conditions?
5. What does Amy Chen enjoy most about driving?
1. What was the first artificial intelligence program created by CMU researchers?
2. What was science fiction in the early 1970s but became common in today’s computers?
3. How many processors were linked together to build a pioneering computer at CMU?
4. What was the first computer system capable of continuous speech recognition?
5. Who developed the first cognitive tutoring program at CMU?
6. What subject does cognitive tutor teach today?
7. How many students does cognitive tutor teach every year?
8. Can you name any of the CMU researchers who worked on developing multi-core processors?
9. What was the problem that CMU researchers faced when they found their existing machines too slow?
10. What was the name of the kitchen table where Newell, his wife, and grad students wrote the instructions for the first artificial intelligence program?
1. What was "Hearsay I"?
2. Who developed the first computer system capable of continuous speech recognition?
3. What was the purpose of creating emoticon?
4. What was the Andrew Project?
5. What was the dream of computer scientists before launching the Andrew Project?
6. What were the capabilities of autonomous robots developed by Red Whittaker?
7. What was the focus of CMU researchers in developing better user interfaces?
8. What was the name of the field developed by CMU researchers?
9. What were some of the pioneering systems developed by scientists in the Language Technologies Institute?
1. What is the Mach kernel?
2. What was the first computer to achieve grandmaster status in chess?
3. What was the first programming language able to run on almost any platform?
4. Who developed the MIME standard?
5. What was the most-visited site on the Web by 1999?
6. Who developed one of the first successful search engines?
1. Who was the most-visited site on the web by 1999?
2. What was the problem that Edmund Clarke stressed the importance of verifying through a formal problem-solving technique called "model checking"?
3. What was invented by Luis von Ahn, Nick Hopper, John Langford and CMU professor Manuel Blum to help foil bots?
4. Who pioneered computer vision advances?
5. What was the name of CMU's self-driving SUV that won the 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge?
6. What were the ways that CMU researchers were able to decode brain scans?
7. What was the name of the system of robotic cameras used in the Super Bowl XXXV broadcast?
8. What was the name of the brain reacts in different ways, depending on what words you're thinking about --- ways that are measurable with magnetic-resonance imaging, or MRI, machines?
9. Who is decoding those brain scans?
20. What year did Kidney donor matching become more efficient?
21. What is the name of the videogame developed by CMU researchers that allows players to fold and shift RNA molecules?
22. What is the name of the language tutoring software developed by CMU spinoff?
23. What year did question-answering machines move from laboratories to TV screens?
24. Who developed an encryption scheme that is difficult to break?
25. What year did smart traffic lights become more efficient?
1. Who was awarded the Turing Award in 2012?
2. What were the practical encoding schemes that were developed?
3. What is the purpose of the smart traffic lights?
4. Where were the new traffic signals first rolled out?
5. What is the benefit of the new traffic signals?
1. What is Yonatan Bisk's research area?
2. What is Ralf Brown's research area?
3. What is Jamie Callan's research area?
4. What is Justine Cassell's research area?
5. Who is the LTI Director and Tenured Professor?
6. What is Fernando Diaz's research area?
7. What is Scott Fahlman's research area?
1. What are the research areas of Scott Fahlman?
2. Where is Robert Frederking's office located?
3. What is Daniel Fried's research area?
4. What is Anatole Gershman's research area?
5. What is Alexander Hauptmann's research area?
6. What is Daphne Ippolito's research area?
7. How can you contact Scott Fahlman?
8. What is Robert Frederking's phone number?
9. Where is Daniel Fried's office located?
10. What is Anatole Gershman's phone number?
1. What is Daphne Ippolito's research area?
2. What is Lori Levin's research area?
3. What is Lei Li's research area?
4. What is Teruko Mitamura's research area?
5. What is Louis-Philippe Morency's research area?
6. What is David Mortensen's research area?
7. What is Daphne Ippolito's email address?
8. What is Lori Levin's office address?
9. What is Lei Li's phone number?
10. What is Teruko Mitamura's phone number?
1. What is Dr. Mortens' email address?
2. What is Dr. Neubig's research area?
3. What is Dr. Nyberg's research area?
4. What is Dr. Oflazer's teaching professorship?
5. What is Dr. Oflazer's research area?
1. Where will the main commencement ceremony take place?
2. What time should guests arrive for the main commencement ceremony?
3. How many diploma ceremonies will take place?
4. Who will give remarks during the main commencement ceremony?
5. What is the date of the Phi Beta Kappa Initiation Ceremony?
6. Where will the Phi Beta Kappa Initiation Ceremony take place?
7. What time is the Phi Beta Kappa Initiation Ceremony?
8. Will tickets be needed for the main commencement ceremony?
9. How long will the main commencement ceremony last?
10. Can any guest attend the main commencement ceremony?
1. Where will the President's Graduates Toast take place?
2. Who needs to register for the President's Graduates Toast?
3. When is the First Gen Graduation Recognition Reception taking place?
4. Where is the College of Fine Arts Ceremony taking place?
5. Who is the contact person for the College of Fine Arts Ceremony?
6. What time is the Senior Leadership Recognition Ceremony taking place?
7. Where is the Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion Ceremony taking place?
8. Who is the contact person for the Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion Ceremony?
9. Where is the Naval ROTC Commissioning Ceremony taking place?
10. Who is the contact person for the Naval ROTC Commissioning Ceremony?
111. When is the President's Reception in honor of CMU's Doctoral Candidates taking place?
12. Where is the President's Reception in honor of CMU's Doctoral Candidates taking place?
1. What time does the student procession begin?
2. Where is the commencement ceremony held?
3. When are the diploma ceremonies held?
4. What happens once the procession begins?
5. Can guests still access guest seating once the procession begins?
1. What is the name of the website that provides information about the history of Carnegie Mellon University?
2. Which department at Carnegie Mellon University is responsible for organizing the Spring Carnival?
3. What is the name of the mascot of Carnegie Mellon University?
4. What is the name of the directory that provides information about all faculty members of Carnegie Mellon University?
5. Which website provides information about the 25th anniversary of the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University?
6. What is the name of the department at Carnegie Mellon University that is responsible for organizing commencement events?
7. Which website provides information about the history of Carnegie Mellon University?
8. What is the name of the buggy that was used during the Spring Carnival?
9. Which website provides information about the Kiltie Band of Carnegie Mellon University?
10. What is the name of the event that was held at Carnegie Mellon University in April 2019?

1. What is Carnegie Mellon University's nickname?
2. Which sports does Carnegie Mellon University offer for men?
3. Which sports does Carnegie Mellon University offer for women?
4. What is Carnegie Mellon University's golf team's schedule for upcoming games?
5. Who is the head coach of Carnegie Mellon University's basketball team?
6. What is Carnegie Mellon University's cross country team's schedule for upcoming races?
7. How many players are on Carnegie Mellon University's soccer team?
8. What is Carnegie Mellon University's football team's schedule for upcoming games?
9. Who is the head coach of Carnegie Mellon University's tennis team?
10. What is Carnegie Mellon University's track and field team's schedule for upcoming meets?
1. What is Scotty's relationship with Carnegie Mellon?
2. What was the purpose of the Mascot Identity Task Force?
3. Which breed is Carnegie Mellon's official mascot?
4. When did Scotty debut as Carnegie Mellon's official mascot?
5. What is unique about Carnegie Mellon's official mascot?

1. What did the Task Force partner with in order to design the official Scotty costume?
2. What breed of dog is the university's mascot?
3. What is the temperament of the Scottish terrier breed?
4. How would you describe the physical aspects of the Scottish terrier breed?
5. What is the significance of the Scottish terrier as Carnegie Mellon's mascot?

1. What dates does the Spring Carnival take place in 2024?
2. What time are the booths, rides, and dog houses open during the weekend?
3. Where can you check-in and register for the Spring Carnival?
4. What performance will be held on Thursday evening?
5. When is Songkran: Thai New Year Celebration taking place during Spring Carnival?
6. What events will be added up until Carnival?
7. How can you submit your photo for the Faces of Carnival Photo Mosaic?
8. When is the deadline to submit your photo for inclusion in the Faces of Carnival Photo Mosaic?
1. What is the theme of the virtual event "Inventing Shakespeare: Text, Technology and The Four Folios"?
2. When is the virtual event "Inventing Shakespeare: Text, Technology and The Four Folios" taking place?
3. What is the focus of the exhibition "Here to Stay: Celebrating 40 Years at the Architecture Archives"?
4. What is the purpose of the "Move On" event?
5. What is the date and time of the WRCT Radio Buggy Preview?
1. What is the topic of the Inventing Shakespeare exhibit?
2. What is the focus of the For the past 40 years, the Architecture Archives collections at Carnegie Mellon University has documented thousands of projects and the work of hundreds of designers exhibition?
3. What is the name of the virtual reality experience?
4. When is the Mixed Reality: A Virtual Reality Escape Room Experience available?
5. What is the location of the Carnival Headquarters Tent?
1. What is included in the "All About the Burgh" fully guided city tour?
2. What is the cost for adults (12 years of age and older) for the 10:30-12:00 tour?
3. What is the cost for children (6-11 years of age. for the 1:30-3:00 tour?
4. What is included in the "Buggy Showcase"?
5. What is the purpose of the Teruko Yata Memorial Lecture in Robotics?
1. What is Impact CMU?
2. What is Crafting with HR Family Care Initiatives?
3. When is the Spring Carnival Midway Opening Ceremony?
4. What activities will be available at the Carnival Activities Tent?
5. Who is sponsoring the Spring Carnival Committee?
6. What is the separate kid zone area for?
1. What is the name of the event that will take place at CMU on Thursday?
2. What time is the Kiltie Band Concert?
3. Where is the Carnival Wellness Tent located?
4. What activities can you participate in at the Carnival Wellness Tent?
5. What is the theme of this year's Booth event?
6. What rides will be available at the Carnival Rides?
7. What special kid's ride area will be available at the Carnival Rides?
8. What time is the Dog Houses Display open?
9. What is the name of the event that is open to the entire CMU community and their guests?
10. What is the purpose of the Carnival Wellness Tent?
1. What time is the Kidzone Tent open?
2. What is the purpose of the Project Olympus Show & Tell?
3. Who is invited to the Kiltie Band Alumni & Student Reception?
4. What is the name of the concert that starts Spring Carnival?
5. What is the Reunion Welcome Back Happy Hour?
6. Who is invited to the Reunion Welcome Back Happy Hour?
1. Who will be recognized and celebrated at the College of Engineering Alumni Awards?
2. What is the date and time of the Activities Board Spring Carnival Speakers Show?
3. What is the name of the event hosted by the Buggy Alumni Association?
4. What is the name of the musical being presented by Scotch'n'Soda Theatre?
5. Who is the main character in Disney's The Little Mermaid?
6. What is the name of the sea witch in Disney's The Little Mermaid?
7. How can tickets for the Scotch'n'Soda Theatre performance be obtained?
8. Is the event open to the entire CMU community or just members of a specific group?
9. What is the cost of tickets for students/faculty/staff?
10. What is the cost of tickets for alumni and guests?
1. What is the location of the Buggy Donut Tent?
2. What is the time frame of the Preliminary Sweepstakes Races?
3. What is the purpose of checking-in at Carnival Headquarters Tent?
4. What is being celebrated at "Here to Stay: Celebrating 40 Years at the Architecture Archives"?
5. What is included in the Tartan Swag Bag giveaway?
1. What inspired the creation of Inventing Shakespeare exhibit?
2. What type of objects can visitors expect to see in the Inventing Shakespeare exhibit?
3. What is the purpose of the Buggy Alumni Association Information Tent?
4. What is the time of the NROTC Flag Raising ceremony?
5. What is the location of the Reunion Buggy Watch Tent?
6. What is the purpose of the 50th Reunion Breakfast/Then & Now Presentation?
7. Who will be presenting at the 50th Reunion Breakfast/Then & Now Presentation?
8. How can individuals join the livestream of the 50th Reunion Breakfast/Then & Now Presentation if they cannot attend in person?
9. Is there a closed-captioned recording of the 50th Reunion Breakfast/Then & Now Presentation available after Carnival?
10. Who is the University Archivist?
1. What time is the 25th Reunion Welcome Breakfast?
2. What is included in the Reunion Exclusive Tours?
3. What is the name of the School of Drama Costume Design Tour?
4. What is the title of the Livestream presentation?
5. What time is the Carnival Activities Tent open?
6. Is the Carnival Activities Tent open to all members of the CMU community?
7. What is the name of the Committee that is sponsoring the Carnival Activities Tent?
8. Is there a separate area for kids at the Carnival Activities Tent?
1. What is Kidzone?
2. What activities will be available at Kidzone?
3. When is Kidzone open?
4. What is Meet & Greet with the Beep-Boop?
5. When is Meet & Greet with the Beep-Boop?
6. What is Campus Community Lunch?
7. Who is invited to Campus Community Lunch?
8. What is the Reunion Reserved Seating During Campus Community Lunch?
9. Who is invited to the Reunion Reserved Seating During Campus Community Lunch?
10. What is the purpose of the Reunion Reserved Seating During Campus Community Lunch?
1. What is the purpose of the Alumni & Department Lunch event?
2. Who is invited to attend the event?
3. What proceeds from the event will go towards?
4. What is the Douse-a-Dean Loving Cup?
5. When is the Dean dousing schedule announced?
6. What is the annual Carnegie Mellon Mobot Races?
7. Who is invited to participate in the annual Carnegie Mellon Mobot Races?
8. What is the purpose of the Pi Kappa Alpha Alumni Gathering?
9. Who is invited to attend the Pi Kappa Alpha Alumni Gathering?
10. Is registration required for the Pi Kappa Alpha Alumni Gathering?
1. What is the purpose of the Design Alumni Gathering?
2. What is the Meta Quest 3-powered walkthrough/escape room experience?
3. What is the purpose of the Biomedical Engineering (BME) Sweets and Treats event?
4. Who is invited to the ChemE Alumni, Faculty & Student Mixer?
5. What is available at the Electrical and Computer Engineering's Totes, T-shirts and Tacos! event?
1. What is the purpose of the Mobot Recap Watch Party?
2. What is the time frame of the Cold Ones with the Coaches event?
3. What is the purpose of the Engineering and Public Policy (EPP) Ice Cream Social?
4. What is the time frame of the Material Science and Engineering (MSE) Alumni Deck Party?
5. What is the purpose of the AB Tech Alumni & Student Mixer?
6. What is the topic of the History of Buggy event?
1. Who is being honored at the Stephen and Joyce Fienberg Memorial Lecture?
2. What is the event time for the NROTC Award Ceremony?
3. What is the event name for the Mellon College of Science Class of 1974 50th Reunion Celebration?
4. What is the time for Reunion Pints with Profs?
5. What is the event name for the NROTC Flag Lowering ceremony?
1. Who will be recognized at the Heinz Alumni Association Awards?
2. What is the Order of the May?
3. What is the purpose of the Heinz Network Pittsburgh event?
4. How long has the Heinz Network Pittsburgh event been held?
5. Who is invited to the Heinz Alumni Association Awards?
6. What is the date and time of the Heinz Network Pittsburgh event?
1. What time is the Scotch'n'Soda Theatre Carnival Show: The Little Mermaid performance?
2. What is the name of the musical being presented by Scotch'n'Soda Theatre?
3. Who is the youngest daughter of King Triton in the musical?
4. What is the name of the sea witch in the musical?
5. How much are tickets for students/faculty/staff for the performance?
6. How much are tickets for alumni and guests for the performance?
7. When is the Buggy Bash event taking place?
8. What is the theme of the Buggy Bash event?
9. Who is invited to attend the 15th and 20th Reunion Reception?
10. When does registration for the reunion event close?
1. What is the time of the reunion reception?
2. What is the cost of attending the reunion reception from now through February 23rd?
3. What is the cost of attending the reunion reception from February 24th through April 5th?
4. What is the name of the show being presented by Scotch'n'Soda Theatre?
5. What is the name of the musical adapted from?
6. Who is the main character of the musical?
7. Who are some of Ariel's colorful friends?
8. How can tickets for Scotch'n'Soda Theatre's performance of "The Little Mermaid" be obtained?
9. Is the performance free or ticketed?
10. Who is funding part of the production of "The Little Mermaid"?
1. Where will the Buggy Alumni Association Information Tent be located during Sweepstakes races?
2. What is open to the entire CMU community and their guests?
3. What is required for check-in at Carnival Headquarters Tent?
4. Which tent is exclusively for Tepper alumni and their families?
5. Where will Reunion Buggy Watch Tent be located during Sweepstakes races?
1. What is the purpose of the Buggy Breakfast event?
2. What is the theme of the Inventing Shakespeare exhibit?
3. What is being celebrated at the Here to Stay exhibition?
4. What is the purpose of the HLAA Presents event?
5. How many years has CMU's Hispanic Latino Alumni Association (HLAA) been established?
1. What time does the SCS Breakfast & Buggy event start?
2. Who is invited to attend the MechE Alumni Breakfast?
3. What is the name of the event where members of the Dietrich community can watch the buggy races?
4. What is the name of the Mellon College of Science event where alumni, parents, students and friends can watch the buggy races?
5. What is the Taste of Pittsburgh Food Truck Festival?
6. Who is invited to attend the Taste of Pittsburgh Food Truck Festival?
1. What is the theme of this year's Spring Carnival?
2. Where can you meet the Beep-Boop annunciator?
3. What activities can you enjoy at the Carnival Rides tent?
4. What is the schedule for Carnival Activities Tent?
5. Who is sponsoring the Spring Carnival Committee and the CMU Alumni Association?
6. What is the hours for each day of Spring Carnival?
7. Is there any event fee for Spring Carnival?
8. Who can attend Spring Carnival?
1. What time does the KidZone tent open and close each day?
2. What activities can families with young children enjoy at the KidZone tent?
3. What is the purpose of the Carnival Wellness Tent?
4. What is the Dog Houses Display open to?
5. When is the CMU Emergency Medical Services Bystander CPR event held?
6. What is the purpose of Hands-only CPR?
7. Who can attend the CMU Emergency Medical Services Bystander CPR event?
8. What is the duration of the CMU Emergency Medical Services Bystander CPR event?
1. What is the purpose of the 50th Reunion Medallion Luncheon?
2. Who is invited to attend the Information Systems 40th Anniversary Celebration?
3. What is the purpose of the Scotch'n'Soda Theatre Alumni Brunch?
4. What is the Beta Sigma Corporation Annual Meeting?
5. What is included in the registration for the Beta Sigma Corporation Annual Meeting?
6. Is there an event fee for any of the events listed? If so, which ones?
1. Where will the Friends of Engineering Bridge be unveiled?
2. What is the theme of the CMBAA's Spring Carnival Meeting?
3. Where is the Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics located?
4. What is the former Skibo Gymnasium being transformed into?
5. What is required of all tour participants of the Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics tours?
1. What is the purpose of the School of Architecture Pavilion Dedication & Alumni Open House?
2. Who can attend the WRCT's 75th Anniversary Reception?
3. What is the purpose of the Current & Former CMU AAB Member Coffee Catch Up?
4. Who is invited to the Spring Carnival Parents and Families Hospitality Suite?
5. What is the time frame for each event?
1. What is the purpose of the Tartan Alumni & Student Reception?
2. Who is invited to attend the DU Alumni Association Board Meeting?
3. What is the purpose of the CMU Emergency Medical Services Cookout?
4. What is the purpose of the Crafting with the Spring Carnival Committee?
5. What is the Reunion Beer Garden?
6. What is the Carnegie Mellon Racing 2024 Rollout?
7. Who will be serving samples of their craft beers at the Reunion Beer Garden?
8. What is the Formula SAE competition?
9. How many students will compete in the race cars designed and built from scratch by the CMR team?
10. Who will attend the event? (Reunion celebrants and their guests)
1. What time is the Dog Costume Party taking place?
2. What is the name of the show being presented by Scotch'n'Soda Theatre?
3. What is the name of the musical being presented by Scotch'n'Soda Theatre?
4. Who is the main character in Disney's The Little Mermaid?
5. What is the name of the new department that was unveiled during the event?
1. What is Tartans on the Rise?
2. What is the purpose of the Spring Carnival Booth & Sweepstakes Award Ceremony?
3. What is the SRS Post-Sweepstakes Awards Gathering?
4. What classes will be celebrating at the Reunion Middle Years Reception?
5. What is the cost of attending the Reunion Middle Years Reception for adults?
6. What is the cost of attending the Reunion Middle Years Reception for children?
7. What is the date range for registration for the Reunion Middle Years Reception?
8. Is the Reunion Middle Years Reception open to the entire Kiltie community?
1. What is the date and time of the Reunion Dinner Reception for the Class of 1999?
2. What is the cost of attending the Reunion Dinner Reception for adults?
3. How much is the cost for children ages 6-12 at the Reunion Dinner Reception?
4. What is the date and time of the 1st Reunion Pre-AB Concert Tailgate?
5. Who is invited to attend the 50th Reunion Dinner Reception?
6. What is the cost of attending the 50th Reunion Dinner Reception?
7. Where is the Activities Board Spring Carnival Concert held?
8. Are CMU Community Members with CMU ID or Alumni with Ticket required to pay for tickets to attend the Activities Board Spring Carnival Concert?
9. How can students, faculty, and staff purchase tickets for the Activities Board Spring Carnival Concert?
10. Are there a limited number of tickets available for alumni through Carnival registration?
1. What is Scotch'n'Soda Theatre presenting this year for their Carnival show?
2. Where will the Delta Upsilon Reception for Alumni, Family and Friends take place?
3. What is being celebrated at the Architecture Archives for 40 years?
4. What type of materials does the Architecture Archives collection include?
5. How much are tickets for the Scotch'n'Soda Theatre show?
6. Is the Delta Upsilon Reception open to the entire CMU community?
7. Is registration required for the Architecture Archives event?
8. How long will the Architecture Archives exhibition run?