No
Home Address - No
Attend rehearsals, Have a positive attitude, Be dependable.
No, the music is changed for every show. You should invest in a good and trusty lyre.
No, you do not need to email your home address to the Kiltie Band Director if you are interested in joining. The email requested includes name, high school, address at Carnegie Mellon (if known), cell number, home number, whether you plan on being in the band or colorguard, and whether you need to borrow an instrument or equipment.
No, any member of the campus community with music experience is able to join the Kiltie Band!
The Kiltie Band rehearses at the CUC Studio Theater.
Borrowing instruments begins at 4:30 p.m. before the first rehearsal on Monday at 5:30 p.m. in the CUC Studio Theater.
Andrew Carnegie was born in Dunfermline, Scotland in 1835. His birthday is November 25th.
Rehearsals for the Kiltie Band on Game Days are from 9:30-11:00 a.m.
Kilties should promote the success of the Kiltie Band by attending rehearsals, having a positive attitude, and being dependable.
If you are interested in joining the Kiltie Band, please email the following information to the band director, Jeremy Olisar: Name High School Address at Carnegie Mellon (if known)  Home address  Cell number  Home number  Whether you plan on being in the band or colorguard  If in the band, what instrument(s) you play  Whether you need to borrow an instrument or equipment  Please include your name, high school, address at Carnegie Mellon (if known), home address, cell number, home number, and whether you plan on being in the band or colorguard. If you play an instrument, please specify which one(s). Additionally, let them know if you need to borrow an instrument or equipment.
The Kiltie Band is a part of Carnegie Mellon University.
Yes, for years students have suited up in an unofficial Scottish terrier costume to excite fans at athletic events.
Yes, there is an official mascot costume of Scotty. According to Document 1, "The Task Force then partnered with a mascot costume company to design our Scottish terrier in the winter of 2007."
